
===== PAGE 57 =====
2026 Annual Town Meeting Warrant       
Town of Acton, Massachusetts   
Page 57 
 
Overall, this article reduces regulatory burdens, lowers costs, and prevents unnecessary delays for 
homeowners, while keeping development consistent with existing neighborhood patterns. The article 
advances Objective 7.4 of the Comprehensive Community Plan which is to support residents’ financial 
ability to remain in Acton for a lifetime, and provides additional flexibility to address the growing 
demand for accessible housing for seniors and families with children, who are a protected class under 
Fair Housing laws. 
 
A Fair Housing review found that this proposed amendment reduces procedural barriers for residents 
with older and smaller homes, promotes equity between homeowners, and removes unintended 
disproportionate impacts created by the current bylaw. 
[Old Section 8.1.4 below in italics for reference]  
8.1.4  Extensions, alterations or changes of Single- and Two-Family Dwellings on 
Nonconforming Lots – One or more extensions, alterations or changes to a single or two-family 
residential STRUCTURE on a nonconforming LOT shall be deemed not to increase any 
nonconformity and shall not require special permits under Section 8.1.5, provided that such 
extensions, alterations or changes comply with all applicable yard requirements and in total do 
not increase the size of the STRUCTURE by more than 15 percent of the GROSS FLOOR AREA in 
existence on April 1, 2012 or the date that LOT became nonconforming, whichever is later.  
 
Direct Inquiries to: Kaila Sauer, Planning Director: planning@actonma.gov / (978) 929-663 
Select Board Member: Fran Arsenault: sb@actonma.gov / (978) 929-6611 
Recommendations: Select Board recommends, Finance Committee recommends, Planning Board 
recommends 
 
Article 20: Amend Zoning Bylaw to Increase Affordability Requirements in 
the MBTA Overlay District (majority vote) 
 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaw by deleting the current Section 4.4.6 and 
replacing it with the following: 
 
4.4.6 Affordability Requirements 
4.4.6.1 For new developments on a LOT containing a total of 15 DWELLING UNITS or less using 
MBTA 1- Residential, MBTA 1 – Mixed Use, or MBTA-2, such developments shall provide a 
minimum of ten percent (10%) of the DWELLING UNITS to be sold, rented, or leased at prices 
and rents that are affordable to individuals or FAMILIES at or below eighty percent (80%) of the 
median income for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area. Said affordable DWELLING 
UNITS shall be eligible for the Subsidized Housing Inventory managed by the Executive Office of 
Housing and Livable Communities.  
4.4.6.2 For new developments on a LOT containing a total of 16 DWELLING UNITS or more 
using MBTA 1- Residential, MBTA 1 – Mixed Use, or MBTA-2, such developments shall provide 
a minimum of: 
a) ten percent (10%) of the DWELLING UNITS to be sold, rented, or leased at prices and 
rents that are affordable to individuals or FAMILIES at or below eighty percent (80%) of 

===== PAGE 58 =====
2026 Annual Town Meeting Warrant       
Town of Acton, Massachusetts   
Page 58 
 
the median income for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area. Said affordable 
DWELLING UNITS shall be eligible for the Subsidized Housing Inventory managed by 
the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities; and 
b) five percent (5%) of the DWELLING UNITS to be sold, rented, or leased at prices and 
rents that are affordable to individuals or FAMILIES at or below sixty-five percent (65%) 
of the median income for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area. Said affordable 
DWELLING UNITS shall be eligible for the Subsidized Housing Inventory managed by 
the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities. 
 
4.4.6.3 Affordability Requirements shall not apply to DWELLING UNITS that were not 
constructed using MBTA 1- Residential, MBTA 1 – Mixed Use, or MBTA-2. 
or take any other action relative thereto.  
 
 
Summary 
 
This article updates the affordability requirements in Acton’s MBTA Overlay District to create a 
higher percentage of income-diverse housing as new development occurs. The proposal focuses only 
on affordability requirements and does not change where the district is located, what uses are allowed, 
or how much housing can be built. 
 
Town Meeting adopted the MBTA Overlay District in 2024 to comply with the MBTA Communities 
Act and to advance recommendations from the South Acton Vision and Action Plan. At that time, 
Acton adopted the standard affordability requirement allowed under state guidance: 10% of units deed-
restricted affordable to households earning up to 80% of Area Median Income (AMI). Communities 
that want to require a greater level of affordability must complete an independent Economic Feasibility 
Analysis showing that the higher affordability requirements can still support realistic housing 
development. 
 
To evaluate this, the Planning Division secured a grant from the Executive Office of Housing and 
Livable Communities to hire the Metropolitan Area Planning Council (MAPC) to conduct the 
Economic Feasibility Analysis. The analysis concluded that higher affordability requirements could be 
supported in the MBTA Overlay District under certain development scenarios.  
 
Based on that analysis, this article proposes a tiered approach: 
- 
Smaller-scale development (15 units and fewer): Maintain the existing requirement of 10% 
of units deed-restricted affordable at 80% AMI. 
- 
Larger-scale development (16 units or more): Maintain the existing requirement of 10% of 
units deed-restricted affordable at 80% AMI, plus an additional 5% of units deed-restricted 
affordable at 65% AMI.  
 
This proposal differentiates requirements based on project size and reflects the findings of the 
feasibility analysis, while still complying with the requirements of the MBTA Communities Act.  
 
[Old Section 4.4.6 below in italics for reference] 
4.4.6 Affordability Requirements for Initial Development – For the initial development of 
Multi-family Dwellings in MBTA 1- Residential, MBTA 1 – Mixed Use, and MBTA-2, such 
developments shall provide a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the DWELLING UNITS to 

===== PAGE 59 =====
2026 Annual Town Meeting Warrant       
Town of Acton, Massachusetts   
Page 59 
 
be sold, rented, or leased at prices and rents that are affordable to individuals or 
FAMILIES at or below eighty percent (80%) of the median income for the Boston Primary 
Metropolitan Statistical Area. Said affordable DWELLING UNITS shall be eligible for the 
Subsidized Housing Inventory managed by the Executive Office of Housing and Livable 
Communities.   
 
Direct Inquiries to: Kaila Sauer, Planning Director: planning@actonma.gov / (978) 929-6631 
Select Board Member: Fran Arsenault: sb@actonma.gov / (978) 929-6611 
Recommendations: Select Board voted to take no action on this article, Finance Committee voted 
not to take a position, Planning Board did not take a position  
 
*Article 21: Amend Zoning Bylaw Related to Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU)s 
(two-thirds majority vote) 
 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaw by deleting the word “permanent” from 
Section 3.8.1.6 g): 
g) Any Accessory DWELLING UNIT in a detached BUILDING shall be constructed on a 
permanent foundation. 
, Or take any other action relative thereto.  
Summary 
 
Town Meeting approved amendments to the Town’s Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) bylaw in 2025 
to bring it into compliance with new state law, the Affordable Homes Act. Upon review, the Attorney 
General approved the bylaw with the exception of the term “permanent,” which is inconsistent with 
state requirements. This article proposes a minor revision to remove that term and ensure full 
compliance with state law, as the current language is unenforceable. 
 
Direct Inquiries to: Kaila Sauer, Planning Director: planning@actonma.gov / (978) 929-6631 
Select Board Member: Fran Arsenault: sb@actonma.gov / (978) 929-6611 
Recommendations: Select Board recommends, Finance Committee recommends, Planning Board 
recommends  
 
*Article 22: Authorize Revolving Fund Budgets (majority vote) 
 
To see if the Town will vote, pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 
44, Section 53E½, to set the annual spending limits for the revolving funds established in Chapter 
Y of the General Bylaws as noted in the FY26 Budgeted Expense column below, or take any other 
action relative thereto. 
 
