
===== PAGE 1 =====
MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District 
ARTICLE __. To see if the Town will vote amend the Ashby Zoning By-laws as follows, or take any other action 
relative thereto. 
 
Amend Ashby’s official Zoning Map by adding the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) 
over the following parcels as shown on Ashby’s Assessor’s Map as of January 1, 2025: Map 15 Parcels 63, 64, and 
64.1.  
 
Amend Section 4.5 Site Plan to include: 
4.5.5 Site Plan Review required for all multi-family development with more than 10 units, two or more buildings, or 
more than 10,000 square feet in section 9.10 MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD). Site 
Plan Reviews in the MCMOD shall be conducted in accordance with Section 9.10.8 of this bylaw. 
 
Amend Section 9 Overlay Districts and Special Provisions by Adding Section 9.10 MBTA Communities Multi-
family Overlay District 
9.10 MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District 
 
9.10.1 Intent and Purpose: 
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multi-family 
housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 
40A). This zoning allows for as of right multi-family housing to encourage: 
1. The production of a variety of housing types that will provide equal access to new housing for people 
with a variety of needs and income levels. 
2. The development of housing that is supportive of public transit, pedestrian, and bicycle travel.  
 
9.10.2 Establishment: 
The MCMOD is an overlay district that is superimposed over the underlying zoning district, consisting of 
Parcels 63, 64, and 64.1 on Assessor’s Map 15 as of January 1, 2025, and is shown on the Town’s official 
Zoning Map.  
 
9.10.3 Definitions: 
 
AFFORDABLE RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. A housing unit that is subject to a use restriction 
recorded in its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or 
household of a specified income, or both. 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Housing that contains Affordable Residential Dwelling Units. 
APPLICANT. A person, business, or organization that applies for a Building Permit, Site Plan Review, 
Special Permit, Variance, Waiver or other zoning approval.  
AS OF RIGHT. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of application without 
the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary zoning 
approval.  
BUILDING COVERAGE. The maximum area of the lot that can be attributed to the footprint of the 
buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building Coverage does not include surface parking.  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. Provisions of Section 9.10.8. General Development Standards made 
applicable to projects within the MCMOD.   
 
EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Community Development, or any 
successor agency. 
 
MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
 
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or more 
buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building.  
 
MULTI-FAMILY ZONING DISTRICT. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay district, in 
which multi-family housing is allowed as of right.  
 
PARKING, SURFACE. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space.  
 
SECTION 3A. Section 3A of M.G.L. Chapter 40A, the MA Zoning Act. 
 
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY.  A detached residential building on a lot designed, intended, and used 
exclusively as the residence of two families. A two-family dwelling shall not include a detached single-
family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit. 
 
9.10.4 Applicability of MCMOD: 
An Applicant may develop multi-family housing located within a MCMOD in accordance with the 
provisions of this Section 9.10.  
 
9.10.4.1  Underlying Zoning.  
The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying zoning districts. The regulations for 
use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning By-law governing the respective underlying 
zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except for uses allowed as of right or by special permit in 
the MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in Section 9.10 are governed by the requirements of the 
underlying zoning district(s).  
 
9.10.5 Permitted Uses  
9.10.5.1 Uses Permitted As of Right.  
The following uses are permitted as of right within the MCMOD.  
 
a.  Housing Allowed by Right. 
In addition to all other uses allowed by right in the underlying zoning districts, Multi-family 
housing, Two-Family Dwellings, and One Family Dwellings (Single Family Dwelling Unit) are 
allowed as of right in the MCMOD.  
 
9.10.5.2 Uses Permitted by Special Permit.  
The following uses require a Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
 
9.10.5.2.1 Home occupations. 
 
9.10.6 Dimensional Standards  
 
9.10.6.1 Table of Dimensional Requirements.  
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this zoning, the dimensional requirements applicable in the 
MCMOD are as follows. 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Minimum Area 80,000 square feet 
Minimum Frontage 200 feet   
Minimum Set-Back from Street Center 75 feet (22.86 m)  
Minimum Side and Rear Yard Set-Back 25 feet (7.62 m)  
Building area shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the lot area.  
Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line 110 feet 
All structures must meet minimum set-back requirements. 
Building Height (Maximum) 40 feet 
Maximum Density 15 units / acre 
 
9.10.6.2 Multi-Building Lots. In the MCMOD, lots may have more than one principal building.  
 
9.10.6.3 Exceptions.  
 
9.10.6.3.1 The limitation on height of buildings shall not apply to significant traditional accessory 
appurtenances such as steeples and bell towers, chimneys, spires, or other ornamental features of 
buildings, which features are in no way used for living purposes.  
 
9.10.6.3.2 Any lot in the MCMOD in existence as of January 1, 2025 shall be considered as a 
buildable lot for the purposes of development under this bylaw. 
 
9.10.6.4 Parking.   
 
9.10.6.4.1 Multi-family housing with three or more residential dwelling units authorized under this 
Section shall have at least 1 parking space per dwelling unit with 2 or fewer bedrooms, and 1.5 per 
dwelling unit with more than 2 bedrooms.   
 
9.10.6.4.2 No parking is permitted in the front yard setback of any lot. 
 
9.10.6.4.3 Off-street parking must be to the rear of the building to the maximum extent possible. 
 
9.10.6.5. Signs.  One sign of one or two sides no larger than 6 square feet (.55 sq. m.) per side may be 
displayed. All electrified signs are prohibited.  All lighted, moving and flashing signs are also 
prohibited. 
 
9.10.7. Site Plan Review in the MCMOD.  
Site Plan Review is required for all multi-family development with more than 10 units, two or more 
buildings, or more than 10,000 square feet in section 9.10 MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay 
District (MCMOD). The Planning Board shall act as the administering authority for any Site Plan Review 
procedure associated with this bylaw. Where standards or other requirements listed as part of this overlay 
district may conflict with those in the underlying district, the MCMOD overlay standards and provisions 
shall apply. 
 
9.10.7.1 Site Plan Review Procedure.  
As part of any application for Site Plan Review for a project within the MCMOD, the Applicant must 
submit all of the following documents to the Planning Board: 
 
(1) Application and fee for Site Plan Review. 
 
(2) Site plans that show the position of the building(s) on the site, points of vehicular access to and 
from the site and vehicular circulation on the site, stormwater management, utilities, and landscape 

===== PAGE 4 =====
treatments, including any screening of adjacent properties, and other information commonly required 
by Municipality for Site Plan Review. 
 
(3) Elevations of the building(s) showing the architectural design of the building. 
 
(4) All site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, and/or a civil engineer 
registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All landscape plans shall be prepared by a 
certified landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All building 
elevations shall be prepared by a certified architect registered in the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts. All plans shall be signed and stamped, and drawings prepared at a scale of one-inch 
equals forty feet (1"=40') or larger, or at a scale as approved in advance by the Planning Board. 
 
(5) Narrative of compliance with the applicable design standards of this bylaw. 
 
9.10.7.2 Timeline.  
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of the filing of a complete application 
for an MCMOD Site Plan and shall file a decision within 90 days of the close of the hearing. Notice of 
the time, place, and subject matter of the public hearing shall be given by the Planning Board, at the 
expense of the Applicant, to the Applicant and to all owners of land abutting the land being the subject 
of such application as appearing on the most recent tax list on file at the Assessor’s Office. In addition, 
the Planning Board shall also give notice of the time, place, and subject matter of the public hearing, at 
the expense of the Applicant, by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, once 
in each of two successive weeks, the first publication being not less than 14 days before the day of 
such hearing. The Planning Board may, when appropriate, seek the input of other municipal boards or 
officials. In general, Site Plan Review should be completed no more than six months after the 
submission of a complete application, unless extended by written permission of the Applicant. 
9.10.7.3 Site Plan Approval.  
Site Plan approval under this section shall be granted upon determination by the Planning Board that 
the following conditions have been satisfied. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions, 
at the expense of the Applicant, to ensure that these conditions have been satisfied. 
(1) The Applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in Ashby’s 
requirements for a Building Permit and Rules and Regulations for Site Plan Review; and 
(2) The project as described in the application meets the development standards set forth in 
Section 9.10.8 Development Standards unless any requirements have been waived by the 
Planning Board. 
9.10.7.4. Project Phasing.  
An Applicant may propose, in a Site Plan Review submission, that a project be developed in phases 
subject to the approval of the Planning Board, provided that the submission shows each phase of the 
project and all associated impacts for each phase and the full build out. However, no project may be 
phased solely to avoid the provisions of Section 9.10.7 of this bylaw. 
 
9.10.8 MCMOD Site Plan Review General Development Standards. 
Development standards in the MCMOD are applicable to all two-family and multi-family developments 
with more than 10 units, or two or more buildings, or more than 10,000 square feet within the MCMOD.  
 
9.10.8.1 Site Design.  
a. Connections. Sidewalks shall provide a direct connection among building entrances, the public 
sidewalk (if applicable), and parking.  
 
b. Vehicular access. Where feasible, curb cuts shall be minimized, and shared driveways encouraged.  
 
