
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 30, 2023  3:01 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Ashland
1.2. Community Category
Commuter rail community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
1124
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
Yes
1.5a. Please list MBTA commuter rail
stations that are located within the
municipal boundaries
Pleasant St and Cordaville Rd, Ashland, MA 01721
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Peter  Matchak
1.7a. Title
Director of Planning 
1.7b. Email Address
pmatchak@ashlandmass.com

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.7c. Phone Number
(508) 881-0100 ext. 7927
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Michael  Herbert
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
Ashland Town Hall
101 Main Street 
Ashland, MA 01721
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
mherbert@ashlandmass.com
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Peter Matchak, Director of Planning 
The town is working to create an updated Master Plan. This core team will
include a planning consultant and a town steering committee.
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
To date, the community has continued to study the current housing market
and demands in Ashland and the MetroWest region while planning for the
future. Ashland with the help of the Metropolitan Area Planning Council in
2021 completed an update to the community's Housing Production Plan in
a two-step housing project. First, the HPP was completed and accepted by
the Commonwealth, however, the second step proposing the adoption of
an inclusionary zoning bylaw is a work in process. Ashland's housing goals
are to foster the continued growth of all housing types ranging from
single-family residential to affordable senior housing.
Ashland's continued work studying housing needs and setting future goals
has included MBTA (3A) zoning. Focusing on MBTA Zoning, Ashland has
done a self-assessment of the current zoning surrounding the Ashland
commuter rail station. There are five zoning districts and seven sub-districts
within a half mile of the Ashland Commuter Rail Station. These districts
include Residential A (RA), Residential B (RB), Industrial (IND), Ashland
Downtown Districts sub-districts A and C (ADD-A and ADD-C), and all
sub-districts in the Rail Transit District (RTD-A through RTD-E). Of these
10 districts and sub-districts, only ADD-A substantially meets the accepted
guidelines. Other zoning districts in the .5-mile radius could meet the MBTA
guidelines with small amendments, while the remaining districts would
need substantial reworking to meet the requirements.
Furthermore, Ashland is at the beginning stages of updating the town's
master plan. This past fall the community funded a new master planning
process last completed in 2003. This cumbersome planning effort has
started internally and the community plans to publish an RFP in the spring
of 2023. The community-wide master planning process will incorporate
MBTA zoning shaping the area around the Ashland commuter rail station
for the decades to come. 
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
Ashland is in the process of updating their Master Plan. 
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
b. An existing zoning district or districts that must be amended to comply
with the Section 3A Guidelines
c. A new 40R or other overlay zoning district

===== PAGE 4 =====
3.1b. Please select the changes that
may be necessary for the existing
district to comply. Optional: Attach any
supporting documents that describe
this district.
Use schedule
Dimensional regulations
Explanation:
There are five zoning districts and seven sub-districts within a half mile of
the Ashland Commuter Rail Station. These districts include Residential A
(RA), Residential B (RB), Industrial (IND), Ashland Downtown Districts
sub-districts A and C (ADD-A and ADD-C), and all sub-districts in the Rail
Transit District (RTD-A through RTD-E). 
Currently, the ADD-A overlay district comes the closest to meeting the
guidelines of these 10 districts and sub-districts. Furthermore, three
existing sub-districts ADD-C, RB, and RTD-E could meet the guidelines
with amendments, while the remaining districts would need substantial
reworking to meet the all requirements. To meet the MBTA zoning
requirements Ashland will need to update the identified zoning districts. 
With the funding approved for a master planning process which is in the
beginning stages Ashland will look to study all options to implement MBTA
Zoning through a community planning public planning process.

===== PAGE 5 =====
3.1c. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work the community has
already done for this district(s).
The ADD-A district is an overlay district that makes up approximately 23
acres within a half-mile radius, mostly along the southern side of Pleasant
Street. ADD-A allows multi-family housing by right and does not place age
or size limits on the housing. Currently, there is no minimum gross density
within the existing ADD-A overlay district. Therefore, a minimum gross
density requirement of 15 units per acre or an analysis showing that this
minimum density is possible will need to be completed to ensure this
district fully complies with the new MBTA zoning requirements.  
Other zoning districts such as ADD-C district covers approximately 3 acres
within the half-acre radius. This area allows multi-family housing by special
permit and does not place age or size limits on the housing. There is no
minimum gross density within the existing bylaw. In order to comply with
the requirements, multi-family housing use would need to be allowed by
right instead of a special permit. A minimum gross density requirement may
be needed to ensure this district fully complies with the requirements. 
There are additional areas outside of the half-mile radius which have the
potential to be included.  First and foremost, is the downtown area which is
just outside of the .5 mile radius and is a great opportunit to promte the
goals of the MBTA zoning by providing the community with hosuing options
in a more traditional high denisity housing pattern. A secound option of the
community would be to look at RTD-E zoning district which comprises 44
acres within a half-mile radius. This area alreay comprises the "the Cirrus"
development a 398 exsiting rental units development and a permitted 180
unit frendly 40B development.
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Non-housing characteristics that are important to the community are the
following: 
•	Nyanza: The proximity of the Nyanza Superfund site to Ashland's
commuter rail station limits the area in which housing is an appropriate use
of the due to contamination.  
•	Density: Respect of traditional housing patters that are in close proximity
of the rail station. This is a new rail station which was relocated from the
downtown in the early 2000's. 
•	Location: Flexibility to consider using more of the Downtown area to meet
the requirements.
•	Water and sewer capacity of existing infrastructure. 
•	Walkability and connectivity to the existing downtown pedestrian
infrastructure.
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline

===== PAGE 6 =====
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Public outreach
Jul 01, 2023
Nov 30, 2023
Short Answer
Developing zoning 
Dec 01, 2023
Feb 29, 2024
Short Answer
 Applying DHCD's compliance model to test for density and unit capacity
Mar 01, 2024
Jun 30, 2024
Short Answer
Holding planning board hearings 
Jul 01, 2024
Sep 30, 2024
Short Answer
Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant zoning
Oct 01, 2024
Nov 29, 2024
Short Answer
Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Nov 30, 2024
