
===== PAGE 3 =====
PLANNING BOARD MARCH 3, 2026                                                                                                                                                                                 
PAGE 3 OF 4
18 months to build. He stated the lot across the street will give the construction workers a place to park and an
area to store materials.
Councilor Holmes asked if there will be any concerns with the soils or any remediation that will be needed.
Attorney Jacobi stated they are going to have to put in air quality controls and that there will undoubtedly be
environmental protections put in place.
Councilor Morrissey asked how they reached the projection of 40 vehicles at the peak hour when 120 apartments
are being proposed. She asked why they stopped the counts at 5:00 p.m. when commuting hours are more
towards 6:00–6:30 p.m.
Mr. Dirk explained that the 41–44 vehicles is during a one–hour period of traffic and that there will be traffic for
every hour before and after the peak but just not has high as the peak. He stated that there will be about 510
vehicles over the course of a 24–hour period of time.
Council Vice–President Dolan asked whose responsibility would it be to adjust the timing of the traffic signals.
Mr. Dirk stated it would be a condition by the Boards and that his company would then apply for the permits to
change the signal timing.
Councilor Sawyer stated that she imagines that the traffic studies are done during the busiest times of the year.
She stated there is a Cumberland Farms right in that area and that it will become a difficult intersection to navigate
with the addition of the apartment complex traffic exiting from Wall Street.
Mr. Dirk stated they look at standard typical days and not during vacation periods.
Councilor Waterman asked if he could expand on the bicycle aspect of the study.
Mr. Dirk stated because of close proximity they are to trails and the train station, bicycle racks will be provide that
are weather protected. He stated the speeds are relatively slow because of the traffic signal. He stated that they
will also be upgrading sidewalks as an added benefit.
Councilor DiLisio asked how many hauling trucks they anticipate would be involved during the demolition phase
of the project, what time would the trucks be arriving and departing from the site, and what impact they would
have on the residents and businesses.
Attorney Jacobi stated it would be treated by the Zoning Board like an earth removal permit. He stated there
would be blockout times, the truck route would be designated, and that they would have to estimate the time
period as well as the number of trucks going in and out per day. 
Emma Yeh asked if the demolition will be a deconstruction or if the materials will be reused and brought to
recycling places.
Attorney Jacobi stated he did not think he could answer the question properly. He stated because of how old the
building is some of the materials may be infused with nastiness that will need to be disposed of properly.
Planning Board Member Emma Yeh expressed concern about the proposed small parking space sizes.
Attorney Jacobi stated that parking space sizes are controlled by the Zoning Board. He stated that an 8–foot
width is not appropriate and will have to be looked at.
Councilor Sawyer asked if they are proposing any affordable or low–income apartments.

===== PAGE 4 =====
PLANNING BOARD MARCH 3, 2026                                                                                                                                                                                 
PAGE 4 OF 4
Attorney Jacobi stated that all of the apartments would be market rate and that they are not requesting a tax
break from the city.
Councilor Morrissey asked if there will be washers and dryers in every unit.
Attorney Jacobi stated yes.
Council President Kobus asked why the lot at 0 County Street is being proposed to be rezone to “TOD”.
Attorney Jacobi stated it is not particularly necessary, but that it struck him that if the whole project is “TOD”, it
would make their application process smoother with the Zoning Board.
Speaking neither for nor against the petition was the Director of Planning and Development Gary Ayrassian who
stated he made some observations during the presentation that he would like to address. He stated he heard
attorney Jacobi state that they are trying to rezone the Lambco property from “Central Business” to “TOD”. He
stated that the Lambco property is currently “Industrial”. He stated that attorney Jacobi referenced an area on
one of the powerpoint slides as being the “TOD” zone and pointed–out the proximity of the Lambco property. He
stated that the area that attorney Jacobi referenced is actually the “MBTA Communities Overlay District” zone
that the Municipal Council adopted in December of 2024. He stated he also questioned the inclusion of 0 County
Street in the rezoning petition. He stated that he is of the opinion that it would be “spot zoning” given that it is
surrounded by and contiguous to land zone “Central Business”. He stated that attorney Jacobi noted that the
Zoning Board would oversee the demolition work and that it would be treated as an “earth removal operation”.
He stated the Zoning Board of Appeals would not oversee the demolition work as it does not have the authority.
He stated that the planning and the demolition would be overseen by the Building Commissioner, the Public
Works Superintendent, and the Fire Chief.
Councilor Morrissey asked if Conservation would be involved in the permitting process.
Mr. Ayrassian stated yes.
Council President Kobus asked if he still saw a path forward if the lot at 0 County Street is not rezoned to “TOD”.
Mr. Ayrassian stated absolutely there is a path.
There being no one else to speak, Council President Kobus asked Planning Board Chairwoman Heather
Whitehead if she saw any reason to keep the joint public hearing open. Ms. Whitehead replied no. Council
President Kobus asked Laurie Sawyer, Chairwoman of the Municipal Council’s Committee on Zoning & Land
Use & Sustainability, if she saw any reason to keep the joint public hearing open. Ms. Sawyer replied no. The
Municipal Council closed the joint public hearing. The Planning Board closed the joint public hearing.
The joint public hearing adjourned at 8:29 p.m.
