
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
320-8.7 MBTA Multifamily Overlay District 
A. Purposes. The purposes of the MBTA Multifamily Overlay District (MOD) are to:  
1. Provide for multifamily housing development or mixed-use development in accordance 
with G.L. c. 40A, § 3A, and the Compliance Guidelines for Multi-family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act (the Guidelines) issued by the Executive Office of 
Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC);  
2.   Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and types to provide access to new housing 
for people with a variety of needs and income levels; and 
3.   Increase the tax base through private investment in new housing development. 
B. Establishment of District 
The MOD is shown on the map entitled, MBTA Multifamily Overlay District, and dated [date], on file 
with the Town Clerk.  
 
C. Applicability.  
Development of land within the MOD may be undertaken subject to the requirements of this Section 8.7 
or by complying with all applicable requirements of the underlying district. Developments proceeding 
under this Section 8.7 shall be governed solely by the provisions herein and the standards or procedures of 
the underlying districts shall not apply. Where the MOD provides for uses and dimensional controls not 
otherwise allowed in the underlying district and/or applicable overlay districts, the provisions of the MOD 
shall control. Uses and dimensional controls of the MOD are not subject to any special permit 
requirements of the underlying district and/or applicable overlay districts.  
 
The MOD contains the following sub-districts, all of which are shown on the Multifamily Overlay 
District map: 
 
Subdistrict 1/West Ayer Village FBC 
Subdistrict 2/Downtown/Park Street FBC 
 
D. Use Regulations 
The following uses shall be permitted in the MOD, subject to MOD Development Plan Review under 
Section 8.7(I).  Section 3.5, Site Plan Review, shall not apply to developments under this Section 8.7. 
 
1. Multifamily housing. For purposes of this Section 8.7, multifamily housing includes a building with 
three or more residential dwelling units containing housing suitable for families as defined in the 
EOHLC Guidelines or two or more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling 
unit in each building. 
2. Accessory uses 
a) Community building 

===== PAGE 2 =====
b) Swimming pool 
c) Tennis court, other game court 
d) Off-street parking 
 
E. Density and Dimensional Regulations 
1. Reference to the Building Development Standards located in 10.4 and 10.5. 
a. 10.4.11, 10.4.12, 10.4.13, 10.4.15, 10.4.16, 10.4.17, 10.4.19, 10.4.20, 10.4.21 
b. 10.5.15, 10.5.16, 10.5.17, 10.5.19, 10.5.20, 10.5.21 
 
F. Affordable Housing.:  
1. In any development of five or more units in the MOD, at least 10 percent of the units shall be 
affordable housing units.  If, when applying the percentage to the total number of units to 
determine the number of affordable units, the number of affordable dwelling units results in a 
fraction, the number shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. 
2. All affordable units in the MOD shall be on-site units. Other methods of providing affordable 
units under Section 10.3.3. C. (2) & (3) shall not apply in the MOD. 
G. Off-Street Parking 
1. In the MOD, off-street parking shall comply with Section 9.1 except as provided in this 
Section 8.7. Section 9.1.4.B shall not require a special permit. 
2. For multifamily development in the MOD, there shall be at least 1.0 parking spaces per unit.     
3. Where practicable, surface parking shall be located to the rear or side of the principal 
building and shall not be located within the minimum setback between the building and 
any lot line adjacent to the street or internal access drive. No surface parking shall be 
located between the front building line of a residential building and the front lot line.  
4. Where practicable, structured parking in a separate parking garage shall be located at least 20 
feet behind the front building line of the multi-family dwellings on the lot.  
H. Other Overlay Districts 
1. No special permits will be required for Section 8.1 Aquifer Protection Overlay 
District, 8.2 Floodplain Overlay District within the MOD Overlay District. 
2. The applicant will still be subject to the requirements and regulations set forth within 
sections 8.1 and 8.2. 
I. Site Development Standards. Unless otherwise provided herein, site development shall comply 
with Section 9, 10.2, 10.4, 10.5 of the Zoning Bylaw provided, however, that uses subject to the 
MOD may not be denied and no special permit is required for uses in the MOD 
1. Connectivity. To the maximum extent possible, Developments shall provide accessible 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Stormwater Management of the Ayer General Bylaws, Section 9.6 Land Clearing and 9.7 
Earth Removal of the Ayer Zoning Bylaws, and the current Massachusetts Stormwater 
Handbook.   
b. Low Impact Development (LID) – Applicants shall incorporate Low Impact 
Development (LID) management practices including nature-based management measures 
in site design and incorporate environmentally sensitive design principles unless 
infeasible and shall comply with the following requirements:  
 
(i) 
Reduce runoff and pollutant loading by managing runoff as close to its source as 
possible;  
(ii) 
Utilize integrated LID and individual small-scale stormwater management 
practices (isolated LID practices) to promote the use of natural systems for 
infiltration, evapotranspiration, the harvesting and use of rainwater, and reduction 
of flows to drainage collection systems;  
(iii) 
Reduce impervious cover;  
(iv) 
Conserve and protect natural lands, especially open space landscapes, high-
quality wildlife habitat, or existing farmland;  
(v) 
Utilize compact building design and increasing density to prevent sprawl, 
enhance walkability, and preserve more undisturbed natural areas;   
c. Subsurface detention and infiltration systems shall be designed with access manholes and 
inspection ports to provide proper means to inspect and maintain the system. All 
subsurface detention and infiltration systems shall contain an internal “forebay” or pre-
treatment chamber row which will allow treatment of first flush runoff (the first 1” of any 
rainstorm) before discharging stormwater to the remainder of the system and shall be 
designed to allow for proper access for inspection and maintenance.  
d. Infiltration measures shall be provided to mitigate post-development increases in runoff 
resulting from proposed rooftops. Runoff from proposed rooftops throughout the site 
shall be directly routed to dedicated infiltration Best Management Practices (BMPs). 
Discharge of roof runoff directly to surface grade is strictly prohibited. If runoff is 
directed to infiltration BMPs which also mitigate surface runoff, the roof runoff shall be 
directly discharged to the BMP and not allowed to comingle with untreated surface runoff 
prior to discharge to the BMP. Installation of metal roofs on buildings and structures 
depicted on the site plan shall meet the requirements of the most current updated version 
of the MA Stormwater Handbook.  
11. Buildings. 
a. Please refer to the general guidance in the Zoning Bylaw, sections 10.4.9 & 10.5.9 
General Guiding principles for the building requirements. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
b. To encourage clustering of buildings and preservation of open space, placement and 
separation of buildings shall be subject to review and comment by the Fire Chief with 
regard to fire safety during Development Plan Review.  
J. MOD Development Plan Approval  
1. All uses in the MOD shall be subject to MOD Development Plan Approval under this Section 
8.7 to the maximum extent possible.  No provision of Section 8.7 shall allow a denial or 
unreasonable conditioning of a multifamily use.  
2. Application Procedures. Application for Development Plan Approval under this Section 8.7 
shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The filing shall include all required forms and submission 
requirements in the Planning Board’s Multifamily Overlay District Rules and Regulations. A 
copy of the Application, including the date and time of filing, as well as the required number 
of copies of the Application, shall be filed forthwith by the Applicant with the Planning 
Board.  
3. Upon receipt by the Board, applications shall be distributed to the Building Commissioner, 
Fire Chief, Police Chief, Health Department, Conservation Commission, Community and 
Economic Development, Select Board, and the Department of Public Works.  Any reports 
from these reviewing parties shall be submitted to the Board within 35 days of filing of the 
Application. The Planning Board or its designee shall forward to the Applicant copies of all 
comments and recommendations received to date from other boards, commissions, or 
departments. 
4. Public Hearing. Within 45 days of receipt of an Application under this Section 8.7, the 
Planning Board shall open a public hearing and review all Applications in accordance with 
G.L. c. 40A, § 11. 
5. No later than 90 days from the date the Application was received by the Town Clerk, the 
Board shall approve the plan with any reasonable conditions it deems appropriate to ensure 
compliance with the requirements of this Section 8.7 and other applicable sections of the 
Zoning Bylaw and file its written decision with the Town Clerk. The decision shall be by 
majority vote.  The time limit for public hearings and taking of action by the Board may be 
extended by written agreement between the Applicant and the Planning Board. A copy of the 
agreement shall be filed with the Town Clerk. 
6. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner and to the Applicant, if other than the 
owner. A notice of the decision shall be sent to the parties in interest and to persons who 
requested a notice at the public hearing. 
7. MOD Development Plan Approval shall remain valid and shall run with the land indefinitely 
provided that construction has commenced within three years after the Board issues the 
decision, excluding time required to adjudicate any appeal from the Board’s decision. The 
time for commencing construction shall also be extended if the Applicant is actively pursuing 
other required permits for the project, or if there is good cause for the Applicant’s failure to 
commence construction, or as may be provided in an approval for a multi-phase Development 

===== PAGE 6 =====
under this Section 8.7. 
8. Design Guidelines.  The Board may adopt Design Guidelines for development in the 
Multifamily Overlay District and shall file a copy with the Town Clerk. The Design 
Guidelines shall be advisory, not mandatory. In the event of any conflict between Section 8.7 
and the Design Guidelines, Section 8.7 shall control. 
J.   The Board may enact rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of Development Plan Approval 
under this Section 8.7, including but not limited to rules and regulations governing the submission of 
applications, waivers, Board review process, approval, construction oversight, consultants, 
modification and fees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Or act in any manner related thereto.  
 
PLANNING BOARD 
 
 
