
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 30, 2023  1:32 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Bedford
1.2. Community Category
Adjacent community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
750
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Tony Fields
1.7a. Title
Planning Director
1.7b. Email Address
afields@bedfordma.gov
1.7c. Phone Number
(781) 275-1548
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Sarah Stanton

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
10 Mudge Way
Bedford, MA 01730
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
sstanton@bedfordma.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Catherine Perry, Assistant Planner
Chris Nelson, GIS Analyst
Jeffrey King, Housing & Economic Development Director
Steven Hagan, Planning Board Chair
Christopher Gittins, Planning Board Member
Amy Lloyd, Planning Board Member
Jacinda Barbehenn, Planning Board Member
Todd Crowley, Planning Board Member
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
2021 zoning amendment to allow freestanding ADUs by right in all
residential districts.
2019 Bedford Housing Study - setting goals to diversify Bedford housing
stock.
2018 adoption of Great Road Zoning Districts, allowing for multifamily
housing in mixed use.
2013 Comprehensive Plan
Bedford is believed to have the highest SHI among "towns" in the
Commonwealth.
Bedford recently used CPA funds to buy permanent protection for 92
expiring affordable housing units.
Bedford continues to create affordable housing units through its mixed-use
zoning options and planned residential developments. 
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
A proposal to allow two-family dwellings by right in all residential districts
will be presented at the 2023 Annual Town Meeting.  The Town is actively
reviewing a friendly 40B at 330 South Road, and in early discussion for a
potential friendly 40B on Carlisle Road.
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies

===== PAGE 3 =====
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
b. An existing zoning district or districts that must be amended to comply
with the Section 3A Guidelines
e. Other zoning strategy
3.1b. Please select the changes that
may be necessary for the existing
district to comply. Optional: Attach any
supporting documents that describe
this district.
Use schedule
Explanation:
Multifamily currently permitted in mixed use scenarios, above and/or behind
commercial storefront in Great Road Districts by special permit. 
Compliance would require that multifamily be allowed by right, and without
commercial element?
3.1e. Please briefly explain the strategy.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents that show planning work
this community has already done for
this strategy.
Town seeking to use technical assistance in exploring various locations
throughout town that may be determined to be suitable for multifamily
housing.
Also exploring the implications of designated existing multifamily housing
developments, whether 40B or mixed use, and whether affordability
components would be lost if brought into compliance with zoning.
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Proximity to bus routes, proximity to activities of daily living and street retail,
walkability, water and sewer infrastructure capacity.
A concern is not to displace key retail sites, while being keen to use
adjacent housing to strengthen them.
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start

===== PAGE 4 =====
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Public Outreach
Jan 01, 2023
Mar 31, 2024
Short Answer
Developing Zoning
Jan 01, 2023
Aug 31, 2023
Short Answer
Applying compliance model
Mar 15, 2023
Sep 30, 2023
Short Answer
Planning Board hearings
Nov 01, 2023
Dec 31, 2023
Short Answer
Legislative Sessions to adopt zoning
Mar 01, 2024
Mar 31, 2024
Short Answer
Submit application to DHCD
Apr 01, 2024
May 31, 2024
If there is any other feedback you would
like to share about the compliance
process, please use this space to
provide it. 
Initial strategy was to continue infill development of multifamily housing
within business districts, as was already occurring.  Requiring multifamily to
"stand alone" means potential loss of retail/restaurant/services that may
change the fabric of the mixed use neighborhoods if we continue that
strategy.  DHCD should revisit the allowance in the preliminary guidance
for multifamily as part of mixed use, when the underlying zoning is a
business or industrial district.
