
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 25, 2023  2:28 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Belmont
1.2. Community Category
Commuter rail community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
1632
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
Yes
1.5a. Please list MBTA commuter rail
stations that are located within the
municipal boundaries
Belmont and Waverley
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Gabriel Distler
1.7a. Title
Staff Planner
1.7b. Email Address
gdistler@belmont-ma.gov

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.7c. Phone Number
(617) 993-2666
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Patrice Garvin
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
455 Concord Avenue
Belmont, MA 02478
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
pgarvin@belmont-ma.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Gabriel Distler, Community Development; Roy Epstein, Select Board
Member; Rachel Heller, Housing Trust; Thayer Donham, Planning Board;
Drew Nealon, Historic District Commission; Paul Joy, Economic
Development Committee; Julie Wu, Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
Implementation Committee; Metropolitan Area Planning Council Staff.
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
The Town is currently in the process of updating its 2018 Housing
Production Plan, and plans to submit the updated Housing Production Plan
for approval by Planning Board and Select Board in the Spring of 2023. 
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
No
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
c. A new 40R or other overlay zoning district
e. Other zoning strategy

===== PAGE 3 =====
3.1c. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work the community has
already done for this district(s).
The Committee is considering creating compliant overlay zoning districts to
include Waverley Square, Belmont Center, South Pleasant Street, sections
of the Trapelo Road corridor, Concord Ave, Brighton Street, and Pleasant
Street near Route 2, in addition to other possible areas. The sizes and
boundaries of the districts will depend in part on our ability to create
compliant zoning within a one-half mile radius of Belmont's commuter rail
stations. For reference we are attaching a copy of Belmont's 2018-2023
Housing Production Plan as well as a copy of the charge that defines the
responsibilities of Belmont's MBTA Communities Advisory Committee.
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14063440167
3.1e. Please briefly explain the strategy.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents that show planning work
this community has already done for
this strategy.
The Committee does not have a specific strategy to consider at this time.
The Committee is leaving open the opportunity to learn through the
community engagement process other zoning strategies that will further
community goals and are compliant with the state law. The Committee
recognizes that recommendations can arise through community
engagement, working with MAPC, and learning from the approaches of
other communities. 
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Our initial list of characteristics includes proximity to transportation
alternatives to private cars, such as the two Commuter Rail Stations, bus
routes, and the future Belmont Community Path (which will connect to the
MBTA Red Line Station at Alewife). We are also considering new overlay
districts to allow mixed use in area already zoned for commercial use.
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Applying DHCD's Compliance Model

===== PAGE 4 =====
Nov 01, 2022
May 31, 2024
Short Answer
Public Outreach
Nov 01, 2022
May 31, 2024
Short Answer
Developing Zoning 
Feb 01, 2023
Feb 29, 2024
Short Answer
Holding Planning Board Hearings
Sep 01, 2023
May 31, 2024
Short Answer
Holding Legislative Sessions
May 01, 2024
May 31, 2024
Short Answer
Submit District Compliance 
Jun 01, 2024
Jun 01, 2024
If there is any other feedback you would
like to share about the compliance
process, please use this space to
provide it. 
In August of 2022 the Town of Belmont's Select Board established the
MBTA Communities Advisory Committee which consists of a member of
the Town's Select Board; Planning Board; Housing Trust; Economic
Development Committee; Historic District Commission; Board of
Assessors; and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Implementation Committee.
For additional information, please see the attached Committee Charge.
This Action Plan was endorsed by the Belmont Select Board and the
Belmont Planning Board in January 2023.
