
===== PAGE 4 =====
 
ARTICLE 3.       Selectman Horsfall made a motion and it was seconded to transfer 
within the FY2026 budget the sum of $15,617.28 from “Town 
Treasurer – Salaries” as follows: the sum of $5,858.95 to “Town 
Treasurer – Salaries Elected” and the sum of $9,758.33 to “Town 
Collector – Salaries Elected.” 
 
 
Explanation:        This article provides for a transfer within the FY2026 budget to 
properly allocate funds between the salary lines for the appointed 
Town Treasurer/Town Collector.  This article provides for the 
payment of prorated wages associated with the vacated Elected 
Collector and Elected Treasurer positions. At Annual Town 
Meeting, the Town appropriated $1 for the vacant Collector’s 
position and a prorated amount for the Elected Treasurer through 
August. 
 
As the transition process extended into October, compensation for 
these elected officials during that interim period was not covered 
by the original appropriation. This article seeks to correct that 
omission and ensure proper payment for services rendered prior to 
the reorganization of the offices. 
 
There is no additional appropriation being requested — this is a 
reallocation of existing funds within the approved budget.  
 
                  No discussion, Motion carried unanimously. 
 
 
ARTICLE 4.       Selectman McCrohan made a motion and it was seconded to amend 
the Berkley Zoning By-Law, being Article 21 of the Town’s 
General By-Laws, by adding a new Section 9.3 thereto, entitled 
“Residential Development Overlay District (RDOD),” and to 
amend the “Town of Berkley Zoning Map” referenced in said 
Zoning By-Law, Section 2.2, to add the RDOD thereto, the 
complete text of which is included and the Zoning Map amendment 
shown on the handout entitled “Residential Development Overlay 
District (RDOD)”  
 
 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Explanation:      This article proposes to amend the Berkley Zoning By-Law by 
creating a new Section 9.3, establishing a Residential Development 
Overlay District (RDOD) and adding it to the Town’s Zoning Map. 
This article proposes the creation of a Residential Development 
Overlay District (RDOD) to permit by-right multi-family housing, 
in compliance with the Commonwealth’s MBTA Communities 
Law (M.G.L. c.40A, §3A). Berkley’s deadline to adopt a compliant 
zoning district is December 31, 2025. The new district is intended 
to provide flexible zoning options that encourage thoughtfully 
planned development subject to Planning Board review and 
standards. The adoption of this bylaw will enable the development 
of market-rate housing within the overlay district and does not 
impose affordability requirements. The full text of the proposed by-
law is included and the map amendment is shown on the handout 
entitled “Residential Development Overlay District (RDOD)”.  
 
Approval of this article requires a simple majority vote. 
 
                          Planning Board: Recommends passage of Article 4 
   
           Resident Voter: Kristina Baptista requested before the main motion, 
she wanted to move to make a motion to return back to the PB for further 
investigation for schools and town oversight.  Atty. Adam Costa explained no 
action would occur, pass over the whole article.  Second on the motion was 
made. K. Baptista further stated the school is at a breaking point, this will 
impact the schools, draft gives a blank check to the Planning Board to do 
whatever they want, she explained further, would like to make a proposal to 
file an action plan to amend and revote in June.  Resident Voter: Barbara 
Miller would like the answer that she got from the state about postponing and 
the town would not be penalized for taking no action. Selectman Vincent 
asked for town counsel’s opinion on this matter.  Atty. Adam Costa explained 
this is a new state statute, any community served by the MBTA would need to 
adopt the statute for multi-family housing.  He further explained Sec 3A, 
MBTA Communities Act.  In terms of consequences town needs to act by the 
end of the year 2025, not sure what the Commonwealth, AG’s office will do if 
the town does not comply with the deadline. He does know a number of grants 
that the town will not be eligible for, but not sure for certain what else could 
happen.  Selectman Vincent explained she was opposed to what was 
presented, a non-vote today we will lose funding, many other towns have been 
sued. A school impact clause is illegal in the MBTA Communities Act. There 

===== PAGE 6 =====
are no more extensions, we need to move forward.  Resident Voter: Edward 
Harmon asked how many units are we talking about, is there a formula.  
Selectman McCrohan stated we are only zoning for up to 151 multi-family 
unit houses, mixed use development.  Selectman Vincent also explained the 
same zoning for up to 151 multi-family units. Resident Voter: Kristina 
Baptista stated Counsel did not respond to her action plan, asking to rethink 
through it and come back to vote with previsions and amendments to protect 
the town. She feels it is scare tactics, need to submit an action plan to the state 
to postpone it.  Asking for a voluntary proposed draft with an action plan to 
submit.  Atty. Adam Costa stated the legislature requires action; he is not sure 
if an action plan is deemed sufficient to the Commonwealth.  He further 
explained Sec 9.3.9 exemptions.  Resident Voter: Jenifer Andrews spoke in 
opposition of the motion.  She stated currently we have quite a bit of school 
choice students, can reduce if we get more students, if concerned about the 
impact on schools, listen to the presentation, hear the proposal, need to take 
action now, vote no on the motion.  Resident Voter: Robin Marshall stated to 
vote no on the motion, everyone should vote for themselves.  Every dept. is 
hurting in this town, if funding is taken away from the town it will hurt the 
town.  Selectman Vincent stated the town has been working on this for the 
past 3 years, tried other options, people are heard.  No further discussion on 
the motion to vote to postpone Article 4, motion to postpone Article 4 was 
denied. Move forward with discussion on Article 4.  Selectman Vincent had a 
slide-show on 3A further explained.  M. Oliveira Chairmain of the Planning 
Board stated by a unanimous vote, the Planning Board recommends to pass of 
both Art 5 & 6.   Resident Voter: Barbar Miller stated she is not in favor of 
being told what to do, but if we vote no, where is the money coming from to 
fight this, a legal battle will be devastating to the town.  The plan is our 
opportunity to comply.  Resident Voter: William Roosa stated he is in favor of 
this, asked if there were any questions or concerns of losing control if the plan 
does not meet the requirements.  Selectman Vincent stated they have been 
working on creating a zoning by law that would be accepted by the state w/ 
Counsel and SRPEDD.  Fire Chief Perry stated as a fire dept. we are being 
forced into complying with this.  We receive $40,0000 a year in grants. We will 
lose the money for the fire dept. if we don’t accept this.  Director of the 
Library Carol Buote stated this year the library got $100,000 in grants from 
the state. The library would lose the grants.  We need to keep the burden off 
the town to build the new library.  Resident Voter: Marcilla Couitt asked how 
big the area is being discussed.  Selectman Vincent stated it is 10 acres, behind 
Camping World going towards Lakeville.  No further discussion.  Motion 
carried unanimously.   
