
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
To: 
The Brockton City Council 
 
Moises M. Rodrigues, President 
 
From: Rob May 
 
Director of Planning and Economic Development 
 
Date: September 15, 2024 
 
Re: 
MBTA Communities and Form-Based Code Zoning Amendment 
 
Over the past two years, the Planning Staff has been working with residents, business owners, 
developers, and your fellow Councilors to prepare a zoning amendment that will bring Brockton into 
compliance with the MBTA Communities Act (MGL 40A 3A). In those two years, we have held eighth 
(8) steering committee meetings, six (6) community meetings, and two (2) city-wide public meetings 
with meaningful public participation. Additionally, the Department has mailed postcards to every 
property owner of record in the Downtown Trout Brook Study Area and every property owners and 
street address in the Campello Study Area announcing the planning effort and specific meeting 
dates.   
 
This memorandum explains the context around the new law and the Planning Board’s proposed 
solution. This solution uses the need to comply as an opportunity to update Brockton’s zoning to 
incorporate the goals of several neighborhood planning efforts and begin to modernize the structure of 
the zoning ordinance. 
 
MBTA Communities Act 
In January 2021, Beacon Hill passed, and Governor Baker signed, the MBTA Communities Act 
(Session Law Part I, Title XXII, Chapter 161A, Section 1). The Act requires 177 Cities and Towns, 
defined as MBTA Communities by Section 1 of MGL c. 161A, to establish “at least 1 district of 
reasonable size in which multi-family housing is permitted as of right.” Where possible, this zoning 
district must be within a half mile from public transportation (commuter rail, bus station, ferry terminal, 
or subway). MBTA Communities must permit the development of housing suitable for families with 
children, and may not impose age restrictions, within the zoning district. 
 
The Department of Housing and Community Development went on to promulgate regulations to 
further guide communities to comply with the act. They even went so far as to identify specific area, 
capacity, and density targets based on the type of MBTA service and the number of existing housing 
units. Brockton was designated a Commuter Rail community and will need to designate a zoning 
district of at least 50 acres, with an estimated capacity of close to 5,600 residential units, 90% of 
which are to be within a half mile radius of a transit station.  
 
Our early analysis found that under our current zoning ordinance, Brockton was not in compliance 
with the Act. A plan to achieve compliance by the December 31, 2024 deadline was submitted to and 
approved by the Department of Housing and Community Development. To assist with implementing 
that plan, the City received technical and finance assistance from Mass Housing Partnership and the 
newly created Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities.  
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
Planning For Compliance  
The Planning Staff sees the Act as a tool to implement neighborhood master plans and an opportunity 
to modernize our woefully outdated zoning ordinance. Rather than draw a circle with a half-mile radius 
over each station, we chose to focus our efforts on the districts where we already have master plans 
and engaged communities. This would keep the rezoning more focused and prevent spillover into 
surrounding single-family home districts. Working with steering committees for the Downtown/Trout 
Brook redevelopment areas and Campello and Southern Main Street study area, we set about crafting 
zoning to comply with the Act.  
 
To enhance our outreach at the start of our work, the Planning Department sent postcards to the 
property owners of record (Downtown/Trout Brook) and the property owners and street addresses 
(Campello) announcing the project and important meeting dates. The information was presented in all 
four of the major languages spoken in Brockton and contained a QR code that would take them to our 
web page for more detailed information.  
 
A clear picture emerged from over a dozen community meetings and engagement encounters. I will 
summarize this in three key priorities: 
• 
First, residents and businesses alike wanted to see increased residential density around the 
three MBTA Stations to support their local business districts and create a walkable, 
vibrant neighborhood.  
• 
Second, the development community and land owners wanted increased flexibility and an 
expansion of by-right uses to reduce their risk.  
• 
Third, the residents wanted some sort of guarantee that the vision they had created for their 
neighborhoods would be implemented as they expected.  
 
It quickly became apparent to the Planning Staff that the traditional form of zoning, known as 
Euclidean Zoning, was insufficient for the task. Euclidean zoning focuses on lot width, building height, 
setback, coverage, etc., which we call “Bulk Regulations,” and land use, but does not regulate the 
finer details that create character, make communities livable, and address the goals we heard 
from the neighborhood studies. Instead, the Planning Staff chose to create a new Form-Based 
Code to replace the existing zoning in these redevelopment areas. 
 
Modernizing the Ordinance: Form-Based Code 
Form-based code (FBC) is a type of zoning code that regulates the physical design of buildings and 
public spaces in a community in addition to the bulk regulations and land uses. And while the written 
“codes” are only a couple of decades old, they reflect the way communities have been created for 
thousands of years. In every culture we more or less see a similar development style, one focused on 
a town square with larger, usually civic, buildings, surrounded by local shops with shopkeepers and 
their families living above or adjacent to their shops. It’s not unusual to see small craft manufactures 
and other commercial uses here too. As you move farther from the center, the focus moves toward 
denser residential development giving way to single family homes, and finally rural agricultural uses 
and pasture lands.  
 
For Brockton we are proposing the creation of nine  (9) new base districts that will supplant the 
existing zoning. Those districts are Neighborhood Residential, Urban Residential, Mixed-1, Mixed-2, 
Mixed-3, Commercial Core, Commercial Business, Commercial Industrial, and Civic. Like our current 
zoning, each of these districts has a minimum lot size, frontage and land uses. However, FBC takes 
that even further by identifying specific building types (not architectural style) and those types have 
additional regulations. Those building types include Detached 1-unit, Rowhouse, Multi-Family 
Residential, Mixed-use, Lab, Box, Free Standing Commercial, and Flex. Those building types include 
various building components that are also permitted. Building components include Awning, Porch, 
Entry Lobby, Bay, and Dormer. The proposed FBC also identifies four (4) different street types within 
the study area, which regulate sidewalk width and ground floor activation. Street types are Primary, 
Secondary, Transitional, and Residential.  
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
With the different Form Based Code Districts, Building and Street Type we have created a menu of 
options that are available to property owners and developers to choose from while still providing the 
residents with a level of certainty for what the end product will look like.  
 
Increased Flexibility 
We heard the concerns of the development community and have drafted various remedies.  
 
FBC would modernize the types of permitted and special permitted uses. More uses are 
permitted in each district. For the first time since our current zoning was adopted in 1965, mixed-use 
development is now by-right. In the easy-to-read Table 4, it should be clear to residents and builders 
alike what we will and will not permit.  
 
Photographs and diagrams are used to provide visual examples and easy-to-understand guides 
that Illustrate key concepts.  
 
Developers will be given the opportunity to increase the number of floors in the Mixed Districts 
through the application of incentives. We want to encourage height, but the community expects 
some sort of benefit in exchange.  
 
Residential density has also been increased, both to comply with the MBTA Communities Act but also 
to help make redevelopment financially viable. New standards for reducing the required number of 
accessory parking spaces have been established.  
 
Thresholds will be set to permit some applications to proceed though Administrative Review, allowing 
smaller developments to bypass Site Plan Review, saving time and money.  
 
With regard to Special Permits, the FBC would Make the Planning Board the permit granting authority, 
limiting the number of cases that have to go to the Zoning Board of Appeals.  
 
Community Predictability 
Because Form-Based Code is more specific than our current zoning, much of the guesswork has 
been taken out of the process. Community residents, who have worked with us along the way, 
have high expectations for development in their neighborhoods. FBC is designed to translate 
those expectations into law. We provide predictability to the community by taking into account how 
developments fit in, interact, and flow with the larger context of a neighborhood instead of only looking 
at, and dealing with, each lot as its own little bubble and universe, which helps prevent developments 
that may technically be allowed, but look and feel completely out of place and at odds with community 
goals. Predictability is also provided to the developers and property owners who will now have a clear 
definition of what is expected from them and development standards to guide their work.  
 
The application process will require developers to identify building and landscape materials, product 
specifications, and detail for review to ensure quality development. That information will be specified 
in their permit documents to prevent a “bait and switch” situation. The administrative process required 
that certified professionals responsible for the project will need to stamp and sign both the application 
documents and the as-built plans, confirming that they comply with the zoning ordinance and the 
conditions of their site plan or special permit approval, as applicable. 
 
Conclusion 
The Form-Based Code addresses two major needs for the City of Brockton:  
 
 
• 
An updated, modernized zoning ordinance that provides flexibility for developers, greater 
certainty for neighborhood residents and business owners, and additional controls for the City 
to ensure development is completed as proposed; and 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
• 
Compliance with the new law by tailoring the requirements to meet the City’s needs for 
housing, economic development, and a better quality of life for all residents as, over time, 
portions of these neighborhoods are redeveloped to meet the requirements of the Form-based 
Code. 
 
 
 
 
