
===== PAGE 1 =====
Form Name: 
MBTA Communities Information Form
Submission Time: 
May 2, 2022 10:52 am
Browser: 
Chrome 100.0.4896.127 / Windows
IP Address: 
209.6.162.131
Unique ID: 
959867238
Location: 
MBTA Community Information Form
1.  What is your Municipality
Brookline
2.  Name of person filling out this form
Kara Brewton
3.  Title of person filling out this form
Director of Planning & Community Development
4.  Email of the person filling out this
form
kbrewton@brooklinema.gov
5.  Phone number of the person filling
out this form
(617) 730-2468
5.a  Will the person filling out this form
ALSO be responsible to ensure
compliance with section 3A of c40A
and/or lead a committee that will
undertake compliance with section 3A
of c.40A?? 
Yes
Section 2 - Community Information
6. Does your municipality have any land
area within 0.5 miles of a public transit
station, defined as a Subway station,
Commuter rail station, Ferry terminal or
Bus station. Note: the definition of “Bus
Station" in the Draft Guidelines: “Bus
station” means a building located at the
intersection of two or more public bus
lines, within which services are
available to bus passengers; provided
that a bus station does not include a
shelter or other structure without walls
and a foundation.
Yes
6.a. What is the name of the public
transit station most likely to be the
location of the multi-family zoning
district that will comply with the Draft
Guidelines? 
Brookline Village, Washington Square, Coolidge Corner, Chestnut Hill,
Cleveland Circle, St. Mary's Station

===== PAGE 2 =====
6.a.1. Are there any known obstacles
(not including existing zoning
regulations) to developing multifamily
projects on land within 0.5 miles from
this public transit station?
No
7.  Does your municipality have any
zoning district(s) where multifamily
development of 15 units/gross acre is
allowed as of right without age
restrictions and without restrictions on
the number of bedrooms?
Yes, more than one district
7.a.  Please provide a link to your
zoning bylaw or ordinance.
https://www.brooklinema.gov/1479/By-Laws-and-Guidelines
7.b.  What is the name of the zoning
district you believe complies with the
requirements of section 3A of c.40A?
While our M, G, L, and I districts allow the unit density, we do not believe
we fully comply to Section 3A (e.g., total capacity that could be feasibly
built in these zones without triggering other Special Permits like setback
relief)).
7.b.1.  What is the name of the second
zoning district you believe complies
with the requirements of section 3A of
c.40A?
See above. For purposes of area calculations, the largest is the G-2 District
in Brookline Village; the second largest is the G-1.75 CC District in
Coolidge Corner.
7.c.  Is the district 50 acres or more?
No
7.c.1. If less than 50 acres, provide the
size of the existing district in acres
38
7.c.2.  Is the second district 50 acres or
more? 
No
7.c.2.1. If less than 50 acres, provide the
size of the existing district in acres
32
7.d.  Is any part of the existing district
within 0.5 miles of a qualifying public
transit station?
Yes
7.d.1. Is any part of the existing second
district within 0.5 miles of a qualifying
public transit station?
Yes
7.e. Is more than half of the district
covered by water bodies, wetlands, or
permanently protected open space, or
subject to any other development
restrictions (not including existing
zoning regulations)? 
No

===== PAGE 3 =====
7.e.1. Is more than half of the second
district covered by water bodies,
wetlands, or permanently protected
open space, or subject to any other
development restrictions (not including
existing zoning regulations)? 
No
8.  In accordance with the How to
Comply in 2022 requirements for MBTA
Communities issued on December 15,
2021, MBTA Communities are required
to hold a briefing about the Draft
Guidelines at a meeting of the Select
Board, City Council or Town Council
prior to May 2, 2022.  Have you held
such a meeting?*
Yes
8.a. What was the date and time of the
meeting?
Apr 05, 2022 06:00 PM
8.b. Upload the Agenda for the meeting
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/12665191941
Section 3  Technical Assistance and Next Steps
9. Please tell us what, if any, technical
assistance you might need in order to
comply with section 3A of c40A based
on the Draft Guidelines issued on
December 15, 2021.
We can draft multifamily zoning without technical assistance
We need technical assistance to calculate multifamily capacity
10. If your municipality needs Technical
Assistance, please indicate which
resources you prefer. 
Consultant procured by a state agency

===== PAGE 4 =====
11.  Use the space below to provide
other information that you were unable
to answer in the questions above. 
Please do not provide comments on
Draft Guidelines here.
We cannot confidently answer the capacity question because we don't
have enough guidance yet from DHCD. For example, if special permits are
required for setback relief, are we supposed to do a parcel by parcel
analysis to demonstrate reasonable capacity? 
Another example is parking. Can we presume all below grade parking as
reasonable, or are we meant to build out a financial analysis and parking
layout for each parcel?
We don't know whether we cannot include parcels in the Coolidge Corner
Overlay District, which requires special permits for demolition. If the
exercise is "blind" about what is there currently, than can we assume that
all the parcels would start cleared of any buildings?
Finally, we need to understand whether we can include properties that are
also in Local Historic Districts or Neighborhood Conservation Districts (in
General By-Law, not zoning).
We cannot move forward with any reasonable analysis or community
engagement until the Guidelines are finalized. Nor can we plan staff and
any community engagement scope until we know when the guidelines will
be available. I request, therefore, that DHCD change the deadline for an
action plan to be approved by DHCD to 12 months following the issuance
of the final guidelines.
Thank you!
