
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
Date:   
December 22, 2022 
 
To: 
 
Select Board, Charles Carey, Meredith Mooney 
 
From:  
Economic Development Advisory Board 
 
Re:  
Harvard Street Multifamily/Mixed-Use Study and MBTA 
Communities Requirements 
 
On December 5, 2022, Senior Planner Maria Morelli presented to the Economic Development 
Advisory Board (EDAB) the preliminary findings of the Regulatory Division’s Multifamily/Mixed Use 
Study focused on Harvard Street. A key expected recommendation of the study involves recalibrating 
the zoning for Harvard Street and consideration of, in particular, form-based zoning, more robust site 
plan review design regulations, additional parking requirement adjustments, and elimination of 
special permit requirements, in order to facilitate and support infill development up to four stories in 
this corridor.  
The Multifamily/Mixed Use Study has been an ongoing project of the Regulatory Division for a few 
years and the remaining one-year timeline recommended for the Study on Harvard Street coincides 
with the timeline for compliance with the requirements of Massachusetts General Law, c.40A, 
Section 3A (“MBTA Communities”). Some key requirements of that section include that the 3A 
District allow housing by-right at a density of 15 units per acre, that the district be a minimum of 41 
contiguous acres in size, that 90% of the district parcels are within half a mile of a transit station, and 
that the district cannot mandate commercial uses (though commercial and other non-residential uses 
may be allowed and incentivized). To comply with the requirements of the section, the Town would 
need to adopt such a district by December 2023. 
Based on the preliminary findings and recommendations presented by Ms. Morelli on December 5, 
2022, EDAB is supportive of the Town complying with the MBTA Communities requirements in a 
meaningful way and supports changes to zoning to encourage redevelopment along Harvard Street 
and the creation of new housing units to further the economic vitality of this commercial corridor. 
Given that the Harvard Street corridor presents many opportunities to advance the Town’s economic 
development and housing needs without up-zoning, EDAB believes that Harvard Street is an 
appropriate focus for further evaluation, under the auspices of the Regulatory Division’s 
Multifamily/Mixed Use Study, for whether zoning adjustments in this corridor could feasibly achieve 
BROOKLINE 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD 
 
 
 
Anne R. Meyers, Co-Chair 
Paul Saner, Co-Chair 
Cliff Brown 
Derrick Choi 
Alan Christ 
Kenneth Lewis 
Carol Levin 
Thomas Nally 
Marilyn Newman 
Alden Raine 
Sandi Silk 
Zeina Talje 

===== PAGE 2 =====
MBTA Communities compliance. The success achieved by a number of Chapter 40B developments in 
delivering both sensitive design and housing units in this corridor, including some in mixed-use 
buildings, further bolsters its suitability for this purpose. 
EDAB supports advancing solutions now that lead to compliance with the MBTA Communities’ 
requirement. EDAB understands the MBTA Communities provision restricting municipalities from 
requiring ground-floor commercial space in 3A Districts, but also recognizes the importance of 
encouraging retention and creation of ground-floor commercial and other non-residential spaces. 
EDAB believes that current market trends suggest that ground-floor commercial uses will be 
concentrated in commercial nodes and not the entire Harvard Street corridor. 
EDAB therefore believes that it is critical for any recalibrated Harvard Street zoning to include 
effective design standards that continue to support and incentivize active ground floor retail and 
commercial uses, such as façade transparency and entry design requirements. Development along 
this mixed-use corridor currently requires a special permit regardless of the use. The MBTA 
Communities Act will allow a developer to elect commercial ground floor uses as-of-right which will 
make such uses easier to permit. Longer term, zoning incentives long advocated by EDAB should be 
established through zoning overlays for larger commercial sites to incentivize commercial 
development above the ground level. 
EDAB looks forward to working with Representative Vitolo and others to explore changes to the 
MBTA Communities Guidelines aimed at providing greater flexibility to municipalities to allow 
requiring ground-floor commercial uses in Section 3A Districts. 
As presented by Ms. Morelli, the Regulatory Division has also identified the following potential risks if 
no action is taken to adjust Harvard Street corridor zoning:   
• 
Housing production in the corridor may remain low, with a correspondingly low generation of 
inclusionary zoning benefits; 
• 
Economic growth from unrealized infill redevelopment potential will not be realized; 
• 
Pedestrian traffic may be insufficient to support commercial tenants; 
• 
Existing one-story retail buildings carry particularly high expenses for property owners and 
their tenants, and that cost may increase; 
• 
In many cases, commercial tenants will continue to bear the full weight of future tax 
increases, especially in triple-net leases where tax and expenses are borne by the tenant. 
• 
Zoning metrics are not right-sized and effectively preclude development to the four-story 
scale and the permitting process will remain expensive and unpredictable; 
• 
Urban design standards, critical to reinforcing the current main street character of Harvard 
Street, will remain loosely defined and regulated as mere guidelines; and 
• 
Infill potential for much needed housing and commercial amenities which would be 
economically viable within the current four-story building envelope and would result in a 
more consistent urban neighborhood, will remain unrealized. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
The Regulatory Division’s preliminary findings suggest that a form-based zoning approach would 
better mitigate these risks, reinforce the current neighborhood character of this vital commercial 
district, provide more predictable building outcomes for developers and the community, and 
facilitate infill development consistent with this neighborhood character. 
The Economic Development Advisory Board commends the progress made by the Regulatory Division 
on this Multifamily/Mixed Use Study, looks forward to contributing additional input as the study 
continues, and supports the Town’s investment of funding to advance this promising and important 
Study, including further study of the potential opportunity for compliance with the MBTA 
Communities Act in connection with zoning measures for the Harvard Street corridor. EDAB is, in 
particular, supportive of requests for funding to contract with firms with extensive form-based zoning 
experience as a next step in evaluating the Harvard Street zoning adjustments under consideration in 
the Study. 
Note: On January 9, 2023, the Economic Development Advisory Board voted X-Y in support of this 
advisory memo. 
