
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 17, 2023  10:38 AM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Brookline
1.2. Community Category
Rapid transit community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
6990
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
Yes
1.4a. Please list MBTA rapid transit
stations that are located within this
municipality's boundaries
Longwood, Brookline Village, Brookline Hills, Beaconsfield, Reservoir,
Saint Mary's Street, Hawes Street, Kent Street, Saint Paul Street, Coolidge
Corner, Summit Avenue, Brandon Hall, Fairbanks Street, Washington
Square, Tappan Street, Dean Road, Englewood Avenue, Cleveland Circle
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
Yes

===== PAGE 2 =====
Description Area
Stations that are located outside of municipal boundaries but that have
"developable station area" within the boundaries might affect district
location criteria, as further described in Section 8 of the Guidelines. Please
refer to Section 1 of the Guidelines for definitions of "transit station area",
"developable station area", and "developable land".
1.6a. Please list the MBTA transit
stations that are located outside of the
municipal boundaries but might have
developable station area within them.
Fenway, Mission Park, Riverway, Back of the Hill, Boston University East,
Boston University Central, Amory Street, Babcock Street, Packards Corner,
Harvard Avenue, Griggs Street, Allston Street, Warren Street, Sutherland
Road, Chiswick Road, Chestnut Hill Avenue
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Kara Brewton
1.7a. Title
Director of Planning & Community Development
1.7b. Email Address
kbrewton@brooklinema.gov
1.7c. Phone Number
(617) 730-2468
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Chas Carey
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
Town Administrator's Office
333 Washington Street
Brookline, MA 02445
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
ccarey@brooklinema.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Maria Morelli, Senior Planner
RKG Consultants
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
In November 2022 draft Housing Production Plan presentation, our
consultant has identified the following goals: (1) increasing support for the
Brookline Housing Authority (BHA) to modernize and develop affordable
housing for low-income households; (2) create more deed-restricted
affordable housing so that 10% of our housing stock is deed-restricted (not
as measured on SHI); (3) change zoning to encourage housing as-of-right;
(4) continue to monitor local preference policy.
Work to date has included: (1) additional funding to BHA with ARPA funds;
(2) working on disposing of two municipal parking lots for housing:
Kent-Station Street lot and Babcock Street lot; (3) multi-family study started
a couple years ago identified minor changes in zoning such as height that
would encourage 4-story buildings along Harvard Street; (4) led regional
analysis of local preference with respect to race.
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
Upzoning on Route 9 between Brookline Village and Brookline Hills;
adjusting inclusionary zoning to require on-site units on smaller projects,
making accessory dwelling units  easier (no special permit).
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
d. A new base zoning district or districts
3.1d. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work this community
has already done for this district.
Harvard Street corridor; see website for work to date:
https://www.brooklinema.gov/2044 and also attached file
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14019199942
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Keeping commercial uses on first floor, developing specific architectural
standards for Brookline Village National Register District
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline

===== PAGE 4 =====
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Educating elected officials on MBTA requirements
Mar 01, 2022
Mar 01, 2023
Short Answer
Analyzing gaps in current zoning to permit multifamily construction and
applying compliance model
Jan 01, 2022
Feb 01, 2023
Short Answer
Small-group meetings with officials, Boards, and Town Meeting Members
Sep 01, 2022
Mar 01, 2023
Short Answer
Develop standards for Brookline Village National Register District
Mar 01, 2023
Jun 30, 2023
Short Answer
Seek reserve fund transfer for emergency funding to create form-based
zoning and develop FBZ
Feb 01, 2023
Jun 30, 2023
