
===== PAGE 1 =====
Page 1 of 1 
 
Article 24 
MBTA Communities – Request for $25,000 
Submitted by: Planning Board 
Intent of Request 
The intent of the request herein is to supplement grant funds with local funds should the Planning Board wish to 
study something specific for which grant funds are not available or awarded. Some potential uses of these funds 
include but are not limited to: commissioning a fiscal impact analysis (in coordination with the Finance 
Committee), hiring a civil engineer or Title 5 subject matter expert (in coordination with the Board of Health), 
hiring a traffic consultant to assess the impacts of higher-density approaches, or hiring an MBTA Communities 
compliance consultant. The Planning Board and Town Planner, in coordination with the Town’s Procurement 
Officer, would be responsible for seeking quotes and selecting a consultant pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 30B 
requirements. Approval for use of the funding will be by vote of the Planning Board pursuant to a posted 
agenda at an open public meeting. It is possible this funding will not be used if there is nothing the Planning 
Board wishes to study that cannot be funded through grants or free technical assistance.  
 
Status of Planning Board MBTA Communities Process 
In March 2024, the Planning Board established an MBTA Communities Subcommittee to explore the feasibility 
of compliance with the MBTA Communities housing law. The Subcommittee included representatives from the 
Planning Board, Select Board, Board of Health, Environmental Sustainability Committee, Housing Trust, 
Conservation Commission, and public. The Subcommittee met 26 times between April and December, 
conducted a survey from June through September, and held two Open Houses in Fall 2024. In December, they 
submitted a report to the Planning Board.  
 
Since January 2025, the Planning Board has been meeting twice monthly – in open public meetings where 
public feedback has been welcome – to investigate 4 different approaches to MBTA Communities compliance 
from several different angles. The Board has held joint meetings with the Finance Committee, Historical 
Commission, Environmental Sustainability Committee, Conservation Commission, Land Stewardship 
Committee, and Board of Health to discuss priorities of each stakeholder group. The Board intends to hold 
additional joint meetings throughout the process as things progress. In addition, the Board is considering 
hosting open houses and conducting another survey – these outreach opportunities will be broadly advertised 
throughout Town. For information on the effort, including the approaches under consideration, and a schedule 
of planned meetings/outreach: https://www.carlislema.gov/1195/MBTA-Communities 
 
Fall Town Meeting is Sunday, November 2nd.  
 
Technical Assistance Received  
The Planning Board and Planning staff have been actively seeking and receiving free technical assistance in 
furtherance of compliance with the MBTA Communities housing law. To date, the Town has been awarded the 
following funding: $40,000 through MassHousing Partnership (MHP) for assistance from Bohler Engineering 
in the form of developing, conceptualizing, modeling and drafting compliant zoning strategies; and $90,000 
through Housing and Livable Communities (HLC) for assistance from Horsley Witten Group in mapping and 
analyzing local groundwater conditions. Staff also attend HLC’s office hours and info sessions and are part of a 
peer-to-peer technical assistance cohort facilitated by the Citizens’ Housing and Planning Association 
(CHAPA). The Planning Board and Planning staff will continue to seek out additional grant funds and technical 
assistance opportunities throughout the duration of this effort.  
