
===== PAGE 3 =====
SPECIAL TOWN MEETING – FEBRUARY 5, 2024 
3 
 
Article 5: Pool Fencing.  To see if Town Meeting will vote to amend Chapter XX of the General By-Laws, 
as follows, or take any other action thereon. 
 
This Chapter, first adopted in 1975, when State law was silent on pool safety requirements, has never been 
amended.  Since that time, the Commonwealth’s Building Code introduced its own safety standards, which 
created a conflict between the two laws.  This has led to difficulty for residents who can incur unexpected 
expenses satisfying both requirements.  This amendment addresses this by striking the inconsistent lan-
guage to mirror the State’s, as shown below.  Deletions are struck through, and insertions are underlined. 
All permanently installed private swimming pools and all other pools capable of retaining 
over two-and-one-half feet of water shall be fully enclosed by a suitable fence or an equiv-
alent enclosure, or means of protection from access to the pool as defined in the Massa-
chusetts State Building Code, not less than fourfive feet in height and containing a self-
latching gate to ensure that small children will be barred from the swimming pool area.  
A full copy of the proposal, including a redlined version of the proposed amendment, is available on the 
Town Clerk’s page of the website: https://www.danversma.gov/799/Town-Meeting-Warrants.  
 
Article 6: Easement at 42 Summer Street.  To see if Town Meeting will vote (1)  to authorize the Select 
Board to grant to C.P. Berry Residences, LLC, on such terms as the Select Board deems appropriate, an 
easement within an area containing three hundred twenty nine (329) square feet, more or less, shown as 
“Easement Area=329+/- S.F.” on a plan entitled “Exhibit Easement Plan of Land in Danvers, MA, Prepared 
for C.P. Berry Residences, LLC”; prepared by Hancock Survey Associates, Inc.; 185 Centre Street, Danvers, 
MA 01923, Scale: 1”=20’; Date 7/19/23; and to authorize the Select Board to take all action necessary to 
accomplish the purposes of this article; or take any other action thereon. 
 
The easement area in question is located on Town of Danvers property, which abuts the property at 42 
Summer Street.  The structure on said property is known as the James Putnam, Jr. House, which is listed 
on the National Register of Historic Places.  The purpose of this grant of easement is to allow said James 
Putnam, Jr. House to continue to encroach, in part, within the layout of Summer Street, a public way, but 
not on the travelled way of Summer Street, and not on the sidewalk within the layout of Summer Street.  
As the structure in question predated both moden zoning and the layout of Summer Street by at least a 
century, staff strongly supports this easement request.  Please refer to Exhibit A in your warrant booklets 
for a map depicting the impacted area. 
 
Article 7: Adaptive Reuse.  To see if Town Meeting will vote to amend Section 30 of the Zoning By-Law, 
or take any other action thereon. 
 
At the 2023 Annual Town Meeting, a study committee (with representatives from the Finance Committee, 
Planning Board, Zoning Board, Preservation Commission, and Historic District Commission) was created to 
review this and other related preservation concepts.   
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
SPECIAL TOWN MEETING – FEBRUARY 5, 2024 
4 
 
“Adaptive reuse” refers to re-using an existing building for a purpose other than for what it was originally 
built or designed.  This can be a viable and attractive alternative to demolition or new construction, while 
retaining historic features of the original building.  In 2022, the Planning office forwarded a similar proposal 
as an option for the building at 42 Summer Street, which was slated for demolition as part of a larger 
project.  Ultimately, demolition of that building was avoided when a buyer emerged with plans to restore 
the structure. 
The formation of the Study Committee in 2023 presented an opportunity to revisit the concept, as there 
are dozens of other pre-1890 structures in Danvers that may be suitable candidates for Adaptive Reuse.  
This amendment would allow property owners of such structures to request dimensional relief (e.g., set-
backs or uses, through a special permit before the Zoning Board).  The Study Committee recommends the 
approval of this version of the proposed by-law. 
A full copy of the proposal, including a redlined version of the proposed amendment, is available on the 
Town Clerk’s page of the website: https://www.danversma.gov/799/Town-Meeting-Warrants.  
 
Article 8: MBTA Communities Act Compliance.  To see if Town Meeting will vote to amend the Zoning 
Bylaw to adjust the minimum densities, parking ratios, and related provisions in the Character Based Zon-
ing Districts to comply with the MBTA Communities Act and its implementing regulations, or take any 
other action thereon. 
 
The MBTA Communities Law was passed in January 2021.  The law intends to address Massachusetts’ hous-
ing shortage by requiring all MBTA Communities, of which Danvers is one of 177, to allow multifamily hous-
ing by right.  Fortunately, the downtown zoning adopted by Town Meeting in February 2020 was informed 
by a draft version of the law, the article passed at Town Meeting, and remains compliant with the Act.  
What needs to be addressed now stems from details included in the implementing regulations, which were 
not finalized until August 2023. 
The proposal under this article amends the downtown zoning districts to satisfy the Commonwealth’s reg-
ulations regarding the minimum densities for multi-family dwellings and the parking rules.  While these 
changes are significant, their impact is not projected to dramatically impact the overall build-out of the 
corridor.  This is partly because the state’s regulations affect the minimum number of units allowed in the 
district rather than the maximum.   
This proposal was workshopped extensively by the Planning Board throughout the fall, with Town Meeting 
members invited to participate on all occasions.  The feedback was instructive, and the proposal has been 
adjusted based on public feedback. 
Failure to fully comply with the MBTA Communities Act would disqualify the Town from participating in 
certain grant programs. e.g. MassWorks, which several years ago provided the Town with $1 million grant 
used to extend the Danvers Rail Trail toward Middleton. 
A full copy of the proposal, including a redlined version of the proposed amendment, is available on the 
Town Clerk’s page of the website: https://www.danversma.gov/799/Town-Meeting-Warrants.  
 

===== PAGE 5 =====
SPECIAL TOWN MEETING – FEBRUARY 5, 2024 
5 
 
Article 9: Housekeeping.  To see if Town Meeting will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaw to to improve 
internal consistency in language, provide clarity where vague, conform to state or case law, and move all 
signage standards to one place, or take any other action thereon. 
 
As the warrant language suggests, staff has noted several instances where the bylaw's language could be 
amended to improve the readability and clarity of the By-Law.  These changes are meant to minimize con-
fusion and/or enforcement actions in the daily administration of the zoning rules.  Changes include: 
• 
Reorganize Section 3, General Provisions, to improve the language around non-conformities.  There 
is no change in policy here. 
• 
Section 4, Site Plan Review.  This section is amended to parallel many elements of special permits, 
such as abutter notification and action deadlines. 
• 
Clarify language in Section 9 (Accessory Uses) and Section 10 (Off Street Parking Standards). 
• 
Merge language regarding the affordable housing provisions into one section while addressing an er-
ror in the formula. 
• 
Clarify the language of Section 30, Special Permits. 
• 
Move all signage requirements into Section 37, Signage.  Based on business feedback, this also in-
cludes allowing temporary signs, typically grand opening or special promotion signage, to remain in 
place for forty-five (45) days rather than ten (10) days. 
• 
Correct any grammatical errors or terminology changes throughout the By-Law to ensure consistency. 
A full copy of the proposal, including a redlined version of the proposed amendment, is available on the 
Town Clerk’s page of the website: https://www.danversma.gov/799/Town-Meeting-Warrants.  
 
Article 10: Citizens’ Petition.  To see if Town will vote to adopt the following bylaw: “No fee shall be 
established for curbside rubbish removal or recycling without the establishment of a by-law establishing 
such fee and the enforcement of such fee.  This provision shall not apply to yard waste, heavy items, white 
good or household hazardous waste”, or take any other action thereon. 
 
This article is included on the Special Town Meeting Warrant because a citizens’ petition (containing valid 
signatures from 100 or more registered voters) was delivered to the Town Clerk’s Office on January 8, 2024.  
The language contained in the petition is currently being reviewed by Town Counsel.  
 
 
 
 
 
