
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 25, 2023  10:42 AM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Dover
1.2. Community Category
Adjacent small town
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
102
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Laura Harbottle
1.7a. Title
Interim Town Planner
1.7b. Email Address
lharbottle@doverma.gov
1.7c. Phone Number
(508) 785-0032 ext. 240
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Robyn Hunter

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
Dover Town House
5 Springdale Ave.
Dover, MA 02030
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
rhunter@doverma.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Robyn Hunter, Chair, Board of Selectmen
Carol Lisbon, Chair, Planning Board
Carl Valente, Interim Town Administrator
Town Planner (when permanent position is filled)
Board of Selectmen
Planning Board
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
HPP Goal 2) - Promote a... diverse and inclusive community with a mix of
housing opportunities...by making key regulator y updates. The Planning
Board is sponsoring a zoning amendment for May, 2023 Town Meeting
which would allow Accessory Dwelling Units by right where attached and
by SP where detached. It will also remove a cap on the annual number of
ADU's and a restriction on the age of house where they can be permitted. 
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
The Planning Board hired a consultant to review zoning for Dover's village
center.  More work is needed, but mixed use with apartments above
businesses is under discussion. 
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
d. A new base zoning district or districts
3.1d. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work this community
has already done for this district.
The Town anticipates using a consultant to identify the best location(s) for a
new base zoning district. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Availability of utilities including water 
Capacity of land to absorb wastewater and septic waste unless sewer
becomes available 
Access to transit stations and/or public transportation in neighboring
communities 
Access to shopping and services
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Begin work with MHP consultant assistance 
Jun 01, 2023
Oct 31, 2023
Short Answer
Hire consultant to develop zoning
Nov 01, 2023
Apr 30, 2025
Short Answer
Education process for Town boards and committees
Nov 01, 2023
Dec 31, 2023
Short Answer
Public education and outreach
Jan 01, 2024
Oct 31, 2024

===== PAGE 4 =====
Short Answer
Develop zoning map and text amendments
Mar 01, 2024
Dec 31, 2024
Short Answer
Apply compliance model on preliminary basis. Review results with DHCD.
Mar 31, 2024
May 15, 2024
Short Answer
Submit zoning map and text amendments to Town Meeting vote
Jan 01, 2025
May 15, 2025
Short Answer
Submit District Compliance Application for DHCD approval.
May 15, 2025
Aug 15, 2025
If there is any other feedback you would
like to share about the compliance
process, please use this space to
provide it. 
Submission of this Action Plan was approved by the Board of Selectmen on
January 20, 2023.
