
===== PAGE 1 =====
1 of 4 
 
 
Town of Duxbury 
 Planning Department 
 
Memorandum 
 
From: Paul Halkiotis, Interim Planning Director 
 
To: MBTA Working Group & Planning Board 
  
RE: MBTA Zoning – Project Compliance 
 
Date: June 13, 2024 
 
Thank you for agreeing to serve on the MBTA Zoning Working Group. The purpose of this 
memo is to help you understand the work that has been completed to date by the Planning 
Department and the Planning Board. The work began in 2022 and has been ongoing since that 
time. You are being assigned to complete the project over the next six months. Since you are 
being asked to finish a project that started two years ago, it is important that you understand the 
progress made to date and decisions that have been made to reach this point. The following is a 
detailed chronology of events, to help bring you up to speed on where we are and how we got 
here. 
• January 2021 – Section 3A of MGL Chapter 40A, passed as part of the 2020 Economic 
Development Bond Bill, was signed into law by the Governor. 
 
• December 15, 2021 – Department of Housing & Community Development (DCHD) 
issued draft guidelines on how to comply with the law. 
 
• August 10, 2022 – DHCD issued final guidelines to determine if an MBTA community is 
in compliance with Section 3A. 
 
• August 24, 2022 – Planning Director, Chris Ryan, sent a memo to the Planning Board 
RE: Preliminary Analysis for MBTA Communities Compliance. 
 
• October 2022 – Chris Ryan applied to Mass Housing Partnership’s (MHP) MBTA 
Communities Technical Assistance Program. 
 
• January 26, 2023 – Duxbury submitted its Action Plan to the State. 
 
• February 17, 2023 – May 2023 – MHP awarded Duxbury with a technical assistance 
grant to work with housing consultant JM Goldson, LLC to assist the Town with 
compliance with the new State zoning laws. Jennifer Goldson worked with Chris Ryan on 
identifying potential MBTA zoning districts in various locations in town. Those locations 
were then input into the State’s compliance model. The compliance model provided a 

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 of 4 
 
detailed analysis of the potential sites, taking into account lot size, building coverage, 
building height, parking, open space, development constraints etc.. in order to determine 
if the selected sites comply with the MBTA zoning requirements. 
 
• February 27, 2023 – Kick-off Meeting with JM Goldson. 
 
• March 3, 2023 – Duxbury was informed by DHCD that the Action Plan was received, 
and the Town has achieved Interim Compliance. 
 
• March 15, 2023 – MA Attorney General issued an Advisory concerning the enforcement 
of the requirements imposed on cities & towns by Ch. 40A, Section 3A. The advisory 
stated: 
o  “All MBTA Communities must comply with the Law” and further states that 
“MBTA Communities cannot avoid their obligations under the law by foregoing 
this funding.” 
o “Communities that fail to comply with the law may be subject to civil 
enforcement action” and, “Communities that fail to comply with the law’s 
requirements also risk liability under federal and state fair housing laws.  The law 
requires that MBTA Communities “shall have” a compliant zoning district and 
does not provide any mechanism by which a town or city may opt out of this 
requirement.” 
 
• March 30, 2023 – Meeting with JM Goldson to go over preliminary findings. 
 
• May 2023 – Chris Ryan mailed out letters to several property owners asking if they are 
interested in having their land be included in the potential districts. 
 
• May 19, 2023 – JM Goldson submitted their technical memo on MBTA Zoning 
Compliance Technical Assistance (“3A TA”) – Process and Findings to the Town, which 
evaluated potential sites using the State’s compliance model. 
 
• June 2023 – Duxbury applied through the One Stop for Growth grant program for 
assistance with developing the zoning. 
 
• June 9, 2023 – Duxbury received a $50,000 Early Action Community Planning technical 
assistance grant to pay for a consultant to assist with developing Zoning Bylaw 
amendments for the proposed districts.  
 
• June-August 2023 – Chris Ryan attended several meetings with the Citizens Housing and 
Planning Association (CHAPA) with a small group of south shore communities to discuss 
best practices and challenges associated with public outreach for the MBTA Communities 
project. 
 
• June 14, 2023 – Chris Ryan sent a memo to the Planning Board, Selectboard, and the 
Town Manager describing the project status. 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 of 4 
 
• July 17, 2023 – Planning Board reviewed the 11 potential sites shown on the following 
map. After some discussion, Sites 1, 2, and 4 were selected by the Planning Board for 
further consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• The initial review criteria for selecting the sites included characteristics as 
being located along a major arterial road, preferred to be along an existing GATRA transit 
route, not have significant physical constraints such as steep slopes or wetlands, be 
located near or on route to concentrations of commercial or community uses, and be large 
enough to meet the area requirements. 
 
• July 20, 2023 – Chris Ryan sent a memo to the Selectboard and Town Manager on MBTA 
Communities Compliance Update.  
 
• 
July 24, 2023 – Chris Ryan met with the Selectboard and updated them on the status of 
the project. The Selectboard agreed to move forward with three primary sites.  
 
• Island Creek Residential Complex 
• Summer - Congress 
• 0 Tremont Street 
 
However, the 0 Tremont Street site was subsequently removed due to ongoing litigation 
between the owner and the Town. This then left two sites under consideration: Island 
Creek Residential Complex and Summer – Congress. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 of 4 
 
 
• August 15, 2023 – A request for proposals (RFP) was posted by the Town to seek 
consultants to assist with the project using the funds received from Early Action 
Community Planning Grant. 
 
• August 17, 2023 – The Executive Office of Housing & Livable Communities (EOHLC, 
formerly DCHC) released revisions to the guidelines for compliance. 
 
• October 2023 – Stantec was selected as the consultant to help the Town develop the 
zoning for the districts. 
 
• December 27, 2023 – Chris Ryan distributed memo recommending the formation of the 
MBTA Communities Working Group (as well as other working groups) to keep the 
project in motion while the Town is without a full-time Planner (Chris left the Town to 
take a position with another Town in August 2023) 
 
• January 19, 2024 – Kick-off Meeting with Stantec 
 
• January-April 2024 – Chris Ryan continued to meet bi-weekly with Stantec to discuss the 
project until the Interim Planning Director, Paul Halkiotis, started with the Town in April. 
 
• May 6, 2024 – Chris Ryan & Paul Halkiotis attended the Selectboard’s meeting to discuss 
the project and the Selectboard voted to establish a working group to help push the 
project forward. 
 
• After reviewing the locations and analysis of their potential for compliance with State 
law, I am recommending that the Town move forward with the Island Creek and the Bongi’s 
property. 
 
I look forward to discussing the project in more detail at our first meeting. 
 
cc: René Read, Town Manager 
 
