
===== PAGE 1 =====
October 09,2024 
 
Duxbury MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Town of Duxbury 
MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
Question 
Response 
Site Selection 
1. Why were the smaller parcels 
eliminated? 
Other parcels (both larger and smaller) were removed from 
consideration for a variety of reasons including sub-optimal 
access to major roadways, anticipated impacts to drinking water 
supply (aquifer), and existing developments and density in the 
immediate areas. 
 
The two commercial parcels were eliminated because including 
mixed-use would require two floors of housing above first floor 
retail. As the Working Group wanted to maintain a lower height 
along Rt. 53, where possible, it was determined to not include 
these two parcels. 
 
The Working Group’s presentation to the Selectboard on July 22, 
2024 regarding parcel selection is available to view at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DEnWrQ3RKAw  starting at 
the timestamp 1:17:11. 
2. I thought you couldn’t build on 
wetlands? Bongi’s floods - where is 
the water going? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By itself, the zoning classification of a property does not confer 
development rights. Any proposal will be subject to many other 
land use regulations, including wetlands protection, septic, and 
building code. 
 
Note that none of the Bongi’s property is “wetland” as classified by 
the National Fish & Wildlife Wetland Inventory, MA DEP wetland 
database, and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
See FIRM map panels 25023C023K and 25023C0238L. 
 
Nonetheless, any water table or drainage issues would have to be 
addressed by a developer, as stormwater cannot be discharged 
on neighboring properties. 
 
The MBTA Communities law (Section 3A) compliance guidance 
states that any multi-family housing produced within the MBTA 
Communities district is subject to, and must comply with, the state 
Wetlands Protection Act and Title 5 of the State Environmental 
Code—even if such compliance means a proposed project will be 
less dense than 15 units per acre. 
 
Source: Compliance Guidelines for Multi-family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act, pg. 13). 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
Duxbury MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
 
             2 
 
3. Why not consider the Island Creek 
land on Washington St? 
The Island Creek Oysters property (formerly Battelle) is relatively 
small at approximately nine acres, contains wetlands, and is in an 
area already densely developed. The Snug Harbor area is 
increasingly affected by tidal flows and flooding. Additionally, there 
is significant septic discharge along Washington Street and 15 
units/acre at this location would exacerbate wastewater flow and 
additional nitrogen directly into Duxbury Bay, which is a significant 
recreational and commercial resource. 
MBTA Communities requirements 
1. Rental apartments - would they count 
toward the affordable housing 
requirement? 
All rental apartments count towards the affordable housing 
requirement provided at least 25% of the units are deed restricted 
affordable*. Single family rental homes and condominiums are not 
counted unless they are deed restricted as affordable. Duxbury’s 
affordable housing requirement is a separate issue from the 
MBTA Communities requirement (Section 3A). 
 
The affordable housing requirement is a provision of state statute 
Chapter 40B which requires all Massachusetts communities to 
have at least 10% of their housing stock deed restricted affordable 
for inclusion on the state’s Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). 
 
*According to the Chapter 40B rental provision, all rental units in a 
development can count as affordable if at least 25% of the units 
are to be occupied by households earning less than 80% AMI OR 
at least 20% of units are to be occupied by households earning 
50% AMI or less for at least 30 years. If fewer units are deed 
restricted affordable, only the units that meet the requirement shall 
be included.  
 
Source: G.L. 40B Comprehensive Permit Projects & Subsidized 
Housing Inventory Guidelines, pg. II-4. 
2. What percentage of low-income 
housing is required? 
MBTA Communities does not have an affordability requirement.  
The Guidelines allow for 3A Zoning to require 10% affordable 
housing (and may include more depending on an Economic 
Feasibility Analysis). It is common practice, however, for many 
cities and towns to require affordable units in a multi-family project 
that requires a special permit, or as a condition for building at 
greater densities than the zoning would otherwise allow. 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
Duxbury MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
 
             3 
Source: Compliance Guidelines for Multi-family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act, pg. 7). 
Zoning, Site Plan Review, other Town processes 
1. Can general zoning change so that 
there is higher density overall? 
Instead of 1 house/acre, allow 4 
houses/acre by right so that there is 
more availability throughout the town. 
Yes, it could. 
 
1. While “4 units per acre” might be possible, Town Meeting would 
have to approve this. The septic system requirements make this 
unlikely to be a viable density town-wide. 
2. Also, it would not help with MBTA Communities Compliance. 
 
2. Is there a draft of the zoning 
amendment available? Will public 
comment or questions be taken on 
the amendment? 
Yes.  
 
Please see the Town of Duxbury web site under "MBTA 
Communities Working Group" 
 
Yes.  
Please attend the Working Group meetings every other Tuesday. 
3. Multi-family will be by right, but will it 
still require site plan reviews? 
Yes. 
 
Additional design requirements specific to this level of density are 
being added. 
 
 
4. Any special considerations for this 
type of development (MBTA 
Communities) in site plan reviews? 
Yes.  
 
We are working to apply lessons learned from the Island Creek 
development. For example, specific controls for light pollution and 
noise pollution. 
Development Related 
1. What happens if the developer only 
builds 100 units? Do we now have to 
find a place for another 150 units? 
No. The Town is only obligated to allow for multifamily zoning of a 
particular density.  If a developer chooses to build fewer units in 
an MBTA Communities district than the maximum permitted, the 
Town is under no obligation to allow additional multifamily 
development than what has been permitted. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
Duxbury MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
 
             4 
2. Who is the builder? 
For the Bongi’s subdistrict, no development plans under the 
proposed overlay zoning have been submitted to the Town to 
date, nor has a builder for any future such plans been identified.   
 
For the Island Creek subdistrict, the current owner is an 
organization known as Beacon Communities. This is the 
developer that constructed, and that owns and manages, the 
existing multifamily units at this site. To date, Beacon 
Communities has submitted no plans to the Town of Duxbury for 
development under the proposed overlay zoning for the Island 
Creek subdistrict. 
3. How often would units go up? 
The Town only needs to provide zoning, there is no requirement 
that the units actually have to be built.  It is impossible to know 
when, or how often, development plans for new construction in the 
MBTA Communities district may be submitted to the Town for 
review. 
4. Will absentee landlords be allowed? 
The Town cannot require a landlord to live at or within a specified 
proximity to a property the landlord owns or manages. 
5. Explain the purchase vs. rental - “up 
to the developers.” 
Zoning in general may not regulate ownership.  The MBTA 
Communities law does not allow the Town to restrict multifamily 
development in an MBTA Communities district to only rental or 
for-sale units. The zoning bylaw amendment must allow by-right 
development of either rental or for-sale multifamily units. It is 
therefore at the developer’s discretion whether to develop rental 
units, for-sale units or possibly a combination of both. 
Impacts of MBTA Communities on Duxbury 
1. What will be done to address traffic 
to Rt. 53? 
Traffic issues will be addressed by the developer during the 
Planning Board’s Site Plan Review. 
 
Additionally, since Duxbury is making positive steps towards 
compliance, the Town can request grants from the 
Commonwealth to fund necessary master planning work to 
thoroughly address traffic to Rt. 53. 
2. Will additional police/fire be 
required? Schools? 
 
 
Studies indicate that tax revenues grow as soon as new units are 
issued occupancy permits, but service demand increases 
gradually as units are sold and people move in. Also, experience 
in other communities shows that large multifamily housing does 
not attract large families, or even families with children, at the 
same rate as large single-family homes do. Our experience with 
Island Creek makes us better prepared for the additional residents 
and associated public service demand. While a formal budget and 
service impact analysis is not within the scope of this Working 
Group, others are developing this information. The most likely 
impacts are a predictable and proportionate rise in public safety 
calls, and a lesser increase in the school population. 
3. What will the effect on our taxes be? 
The Town has requested a year extension to allow time to conduct 
a fiscal impact assessment. At this time, the Working Group is 
unable to determine the effect on our taxes. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
Duxbury MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
 
             5 
4. We moved to Duxbury to avoid low-
income/high-density housing. I am 
afraid this will ruin/change this town. 
Comment? 
Duxbury’s existing zoning will remain as will the site review 
process. Both are tools that regulate development and will 
continue to inform decisions on future development projects 
proposed in Duxbury. 
 
Right next door to Bongi's is the Village at Duxbury, a large, high 
density 55+ development. The buildings are much larger than 
typical homes and are consistent with Duxbury architecture with 
dormers and shingle-clad. The neighborhood was improved by 
this construction, and many Duxbury residents are very happily 
living there now. 
 
The Envision Duxbury Comprehensive Plan and Livable Duxbury, 
Duxbury’s age and dementia friendly action plan, both include 
survey results from residents that have specifically asked for more 
low-income housing to accommodate municipal workers, first time 
home buyers, the aging population, and families. In Duxbury 
housing prices exceed the reach of households with median 
incomes. As an example, a four-person household with an 80% 
average median income of $130,500 can afford to pay $342,650 
for a three-bedroom single-family home. Last year the average 
three-bedroom single-family home was priced at $889,552. 
5. What are they doing about septic? 
Where is the water runoff? 
The developer will be responsible for complying with Title V and 
for designing a wastewater treatment plant. Anything above 
10,000 gallons per day is permitted by MassDEP.   
 
The developer is also responsible for addressing stormwater and 
for adhering to the stormwater regulations. This will be reviewed 
by the Planning Board at the Site Plan Review. 
 
Section 3A compliance guidelines state that any multi-family 
housing produced within the district is subject to and must comply 
with Title 5 of the State Environmental Code even if such 
compliance means a proposed project will be less dense than 15 
units per acre. 
 
Compliance with Section 3A does not require a municipality to 
install new water or wastewater infrastructure, or add to the 
capacity of existing infrastructure, to accommodate future multi-
family housing production within the multi-family zoning district. 
Where public systems currently exist, but capacity is limited, 
private developers may be able to support the cost of necessary 
water and sewer extensions. While the zoning must allow for 
gross average density of at least 15 units per acre, there may be 
other legal or practical limitations, including lack of infrastructure 
or infrastructure capacity, that result in actual housing production 
at lower density than the zoning allows. 
 
Source: Compliance Guidelines for Multi-family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act, pg. 11-13. 
6. What is the residual effect of traffic 
(Bongi’s)? 
It is likely that traffic will increase along Rt. 53. 
 
 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
Duxbury MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
 
             6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Concerning Island Creek: As an adult 
from Deacons Path, I am concerned 
about traffic in that area. Accidents 
occur often at the intersection of Rt 
3. We have needed traffic lights at 
that location for years, but the state 
has yet to install any. This proposal, 
as stated, would greatly increase 
traffic congestion and probable 
serious accidents. Are there any 
plans to remedy this situation before 
any further development/building at 
Island Creek? 
Given that the site is already developed, we do not foresee 
additional development occurring there any time soon. Any 
increased development and traffic will be addressed during the 
Site Plan Review. 
8. Autumn and Reed have had severe 
issues with a very high water table, 
and most of us pump every spring. 
Placing 267 or more multi-family 
housing units on 20 acres of land in 
our residential neighborhood is very 
concerning. With potential 4 people 
per unit, this means over 1,000 
people adding to this water table. It 
will certainly impact our property 
values, with at least one car per unit, 
this will be at least 267 cars and 
maybe over 500, adding to very real 
traffic issues. I live directly across the 
street from Bongi’s on Autumn. 
Autumn, Reed, & Clearwater have 
about 90 homes. 
Zoning does not equate development. Any developer will have to 
address the high water table and traffic. 
Consequences of Non-compliance 
1. How much grant money does 
Duxbury lose if it sets vote down? 
Over the past 24 months the State has issued $2.37 million to 
Duxbury. Duxbury would not be eligible for new state grants and 
funding for ongoing projects may be revoked, as demonstrated 
with Milton, MA. 
 
This summer the Town submitted two applications totaling $5 
million for construction of the $20 million seawall. The Planning 
Department and DPW are currently working on a grant application 
for Complete Streets for $500,000 to build a sidewalk on three 
segments on Washington Street. We would no longer be eligible 
for those grants if we do not comply with the law. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
Duxbury MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
 
             7 
2. What are examples of the state’s 
funds which could be withheld if this 
doesn’t pass? 
EOHLC has confirmed that communities who fail to comply with 
the MBTA Communities law will lose eligibility for the grants listed 
below. Town Counsel has also confirmed that all State’s grants 
are discretionary. The Town of Milton’s seawall grant was revoked 
due to noncompliance and their particular grant was not on this 
list.  
 
1. Community Planning Grants, EOHLC, 
2. Massachusetts Downtown Initiative, EOED, 
3. Urban Agenda, EOED, 
4. Rural and Small Town Development Fund, EOED, 
5. Brownfields Redevelopment Fund, MassDevelopment, 
6. Site Readiness Program, MassDevelopment, 
7. Underutilized Properties Program, MassDevelopment, 
8. Collaborative Workspace Program, MassDevelopment, 
9. Real Estate Services Technical Assistance, 
MassDevelopment, 
10. Commonwealth Places Programs, MassDevelopment, 
11. Land Use Planning Grants, EOEEA, 
12. Local Acquisitions for Natural Diversity (LAND) Grants, 
EOEEA, and 
13. Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness (MVP) Planning and 
Project Grants, EOEEA 
Additional information can be found here: 
https://www.mass.gov/info-details/section-3a-guidelines  
3. How much grant or matching 
state/federal funding is at stake if we 
do not pass the MBTA communities 
mandate? 
Town Counsel confirmed that all state grants are discretionary and 
can be withheld at any time. 
4. Breakdown of potential loss of 
funding to the town. 
Over the past 24 months the State has issued $2.37 million to 
Duxbury. Duxbury would not be eligible for new state grants and 
funding for ongoing projects may be revoked, as demonstrated 
with Milton, MA. 
5. What is the amount of funding lost if 
no participation (one-time $, 
annually)? 
Over the past 24 months the State has issued $2.37 million to 
Duxbury. Duxbury would not be eligible for new state grants and 
funding for ongoing projects may be revoked, as demonstrated 
with Milton, MA. 
6. Historically, how much $ has 
Duxbury received in state grants that 
we would lose if we decided not to 
comply? What kinds of grants? 
Over the past 24 months the State has issued $2.37 million to 
Duxbury for beach nourishment ($2 million), Snug Harbor 
Feasibility Study ($196,000), Stantec Consulting for MBTA 
Communities ($50,000), Consultant for the Halls Corner Master 
Plan ($90,000), and MACP’s consulting work to update 
Inclusionary and Residential Conservation Cluster ($41,180). 
Communication 
1. You need to up your communication 
- I received a flyer about this meeting 
from a neighbor. 
The Working Group has held several public forums and every 
Working Group meeting on the Town website and is open to the 
public. The schedule of future public forums are also on the 
website, here: https://www.town.duxbury.ma.us/mbta-
communities-working-group 

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
Duxbury MBTA Communities FAQ 
 
 
             8 
2. What is your communication 
strategy? 
Our communication strategy is to be as transparent as possible, 
and to hold as many public forums as possible given the limited 
time available. Letters went out to all abutters within 300 feet of 
the proposed overlay districts, and many have attended our 
sessions.  
3. There should be all the slides 
available online for us to review - 
how will you make this available? 
Slides, maps, and information about the development of the 
bylaws is available on the Town website at: 
https://www.town.duxbury.ma.us/mbta-communities-working-
group/pages/memos-reports-presentations-maps  
4. Why weren’t we notified by the town 
about this meeting? 
Meetings and agendas are posted on the Town website at: 
https://www.town.duxbury.ma.us/mbta-communities-working-
group/pages/mbta-communities-overview.  
 
Meetings are also frequently part of the Duxbury Clipper articles 
reporting on MBTA communities. 
Miscellaneous 
1. What would potential new housing 
cost the town? 
There is not an easy answer to this excellent question. There are 
many variables that depend on the number and type of housing 
that eventually gets built and over what timeframe. There was not 
time or funding available to conduct such a complex study. 
2. Has there been an economic 
analysis completed that evaluates 
the economic impact to homeowners 
that abut the areas of changed 
zoning? 
See above answer. A study to address abutters would be a subset 
of the economic impact to the town. 
3. What will you do for our adult 
children with excellent jobs who have 
moved out of town due to the very 
issues that you discuss? 
We have included 10% mandated affordable housing in the 
proposed bylaw and are overseeing a state required financial 
feasibility study to increase that mandate up to 20%. 
 
Continuing to reduce barriers to multifamily housing and 
affordable housing development will expand and diversify 
Duxbury’s housing stock, generating more opportunities for former 
residents to return to town.  
4. Suggestion: Provide senior housing 
with incentives to sell our homes to 
our adult children. 
The MBTA Communities act forbids restricting new housing by 
age. Providing incentives is beyond the scope of the Working 
Group. 
 
 
Notes: 
• 
This FAQ was developed from questions submitted during the first Duxbury MBTA Communities Open 
House on September 5, 2024. 
• 
The MBTA Communities law refers to the 2021 amendments made to Section 3A of the State Zoning 
Act, MGL CH 40A. 
