
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 26, 2023  12:15 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Duxbury
1.2. Community Category
Adjacent community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
750
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Christopher Ryan
1.7a. Title
Director of Planning
1.7b. Email Address
cryan@duxbury-ma.gov
1.7c. Phone Number
(781) 934-1100 ext. 5475
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Rene Read

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
878 Tremont Street
Duxbury, MA 02452-8800
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
read@duxbury-ma.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Emily Hadley, Planning Administrator
Scott Casagrande, Planning Board Chair
Brian Glennon, Planning Board Vice-Chair
Kristin Rappe, Planning Board Member
Keith MacDonald, Planning Board Member
David Uitti, Planning Board Member
Jennifer Turcotte, Planning Board Member
JM Goldson Associates, Technical Consultant
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
2019 Housing Production Plan Update
- Zoning & Planning Strategies (p. 81)
  4. Amend Inclusionary Bylaw
  5. Amend Neighborhood Business District to encourage upper floor
multifamily
- Housing Production Strategies (p. 85)
  2. ID and make available town-owned land for affordable housing
development
  3. ID vacant, abandoned, underutilized land for affordable or mixed
income housing projects
  5. Continue to partner with private developers.
2019 Comprehensive Plan
Housing Goal 1: Diversify housing options to support an aging population,
affordability, and a more diverse population.
- Strategy 1.1: Foster new housing types, such as mixed-use housing at
neighborhood business 
districts or new housing types for downsizing seniors/starter homes.
- Strategy 1.3: Encourage efforts to address housing affordability including
supporting the Affordable Housing Trust, cooperative housing, or other
models to diversify housing offerings and options, identify Town-owned or
privately owned land suitable for housing production, permit and document
previously un-permitted housing units, and preserve existing affordable
units and deed restrictions.
Housing Goal 5: Integrate new housing into existing neighborhood
business districts.
- Strategy 5.2: Encourage the redevelopment of single-story commercial
buildings into multiple story buildings that include ground floor commercial
uses and upper floor residential units in the neighborhood business districts
of Hall's Corner, Snug Harbor, and Millbrook.
- Strategy 5.3: Streamline zoning and permitting approvals for projects that
include residential uses and amend the zoning bylaw to encourage mixed
uses in existing neighborhood business districts
- Strategy 5.4: Explore targeted infrastructure investments, such as
wastewater, to support additional mixed-use activity in neighborhood
business districts.
- Strategy 5.5: Focus regulations and incentives on the creation of both
smaller units and rental units to diversify housing options in existing
neighborhood business districts
Economic Development Goal 1: Focus on distinct neighborhood business
district-based economic 
development
- Strategy 1.3: Increase residences within and near the business districts
by working with property owners to determine priority underutilized sites for
mixed use redevelopment.

===== PAGE 4 =====
Land Use Goal 2: Incrementally improve nodes of current activity, such as
neighborhood business districts, as walkable, amenity-rich neighborhood
centers.
- Strategy 2.2: Explore zoning options to enhance incentives for the
creation of diverse housing options where suitable.

===== PAGE 5 =====
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
Seeking funds to revise the inclusionary and OSRD bylaws for expanded
housing opportunity and affordability
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
a. An existing zoning district or districts that might already comply with the
Section 3A Guidelines
c. A new 40R or other overlay zoning district
d. A new base zoning district or districts
e. Other zoning strategy
3.1a. Please identify and briefly describe
the possibly-compliant district(s),
including any characteristics of existing
development or transit options that
make it suitable for use as this
community's 3A-compliant district.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents.
Duxbury is considering one site, composed of 15 separate parcels
comprising 27.38 acres that are being strongly considered for the primary
minimum 25-acre MBTA zoned area. Much of the 27.38-acre area has
already been developed for market rate multifamily housing at a density
just over 13 units per acre. However, some of the parcels may not be
eligible so we have also identified an additional two parcels with over 50
acres combined that could be used to supplement acreage to reach the
required 25. The expectation is that this area would be rezoned to a base
multifamily zone with as-of-right permitting at 15 units per acre. It is
possible that there would be the potential for new development in this zone
based on designating enough of the additional 50 acres. This site is served
by public transit as it is located along a bus route. Additionally, the Town is
looking to develop pedestrian facilities linking the site to shopping and
services via the Complete Streets program.
3.1c. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work the community has
already done for this district(s).
There is one potential 40R or similar type of development opportunity
located around a key intersection on Route 53 in west Duxbury. The area is
ideally situated and structured for a mixed-use village type of development
opportunity. The site consists of six (6) initial parcels totaling 22.08 acres
but additional land adjacent to the site may also be available for acquisition.
A master plan would be needed to fully flesh out the conceptual idea but
the expectation is that it would include multifamily buildings, row houses,
and apartments above storefront commercial uses and be able to
accommodate from 150-250 units. There is a strong interest in using
Form-Based Codes for this area. The site is located along a state highway
but currently lacks transit or pedestrian facilities. However, it is located on
the most direct route to the Kingston commuter rail station.

===== PAGE 6 =====
3.1d. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work this community
has already done for this district.
There are four areas currently under consideration with areas including 3,
104, 32, 18, and 9 acres respectively that are being considered for two new
base multifamily zone types based on development scale. Larger parcels
would likely be appropriate for a more conventional multifamily zoning
district while the smaller sites might be appropriate for more a boutique-like
development. Sites have just recently been identified from a larger pool of
options and we are currently looking for comparable bylaws that fit the
typology. One of these sites is located on a public transit route and none
currently have pedestrian facilities adjacent or nearby.
3.1e. Please briefly explain the strategy.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents that show planning work
this community has already done for
this strategy.
There are two other areas under consideration to establish a special zoning
district, base or overlay, which affixes to an already developed area. One is
a traditional commercial center or node and another is an intersection with
some commercial uses that could be reconfigured. The idea would be to
develop opportunities for residential infill (by-right) for specific parcels in the
district and some additional residential opportunities all according to an
area or specific plan. Both of these areas are served by public transit and
one is already served by sidewalks.
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Duxbury considers it important that potential multifamily districts be
integrated into the community fabric and function seamlessly in regard to
mobility, services, and amenities. We are striving to have selected sites
located along commuter routes including bus lines and those roads that
most directly connect to adjacent community commuter rail stations.
Additionally, connecting facilities and services to these sites via pedestrian
and bicycle facilities is a key criterion. We have a number of specific
Complete Streets projects identified in our 2021 Prioritization Plan and
several additional projects expected to be added to a 2023 update to the
Plan that we aim to coordinate with the designated sites. We feel that it is
important to residents of these developments to have some means to
reasonably access shopping, government services, recreation, and other
activities without the need for a private car. Finally, we hope to integrate
green and sustainable elements in these developments including but not
limited to useable open space, shade trees, community gardens,
alternative energy provisions, and other sustainable building practices,
understanding that these elements are not intended to add any significant
cost to the developments.
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline

===== PAGE 7 =====
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Site Selection
Jan 02, 2023
Feb 28, 2023
Short Answer
Public Participation
Mar 06, 2023
Dec 06, 2024
Short Answer
Compliance Model Analysis
Jan 30, 2023
Jun 30, 2023
Short Answer
Short-Range Plans
May 19, 2023
Jun 06, 2024
Short Answer
Developing Zoning
Jun 02, 2023
Aug 17, 2024
Short Answer
Planning Board Public Hearings
Aug 20, 2024
Oct 01, 2024
