
===== PAGE 19 =====
 
18 | P a g e 
 
 
Revolving Fund 
Authorized to 
Spend 
Use of Funds 
Revenue 
Source 
FY27 
Limit 
COA Programs & Mini-
Bus 
Council on 
Aging Board 
Exclusively to defray expenses for 
COA programs and mini-bus 
repairs 
Fees 
Rec’d 
$10,000 
Center at Sachem Rock 
Rental 
Select Board 
To provide funding for expenses 
associated with room rental at the 
Sachem Center 
Fees 
Rec’d 
$20,000 
Recreation 
Commission Activities 
Recreation 
Commissioners 
To fund recreational activities, field 
and equipment repairs, and field 
development 
Fees 
Rec’d 
$40,000 
Passport Photo Fees 
Veterans’ 
Agent 
Expenses for photo supplies 
associated with the sale of 
passport photos. 
Fees 
Rec’d 
$3,000 
Public Library 
Library 
Trustees 
Library Activities 
Fees & 
Fines 
$6,000 
 
 
ARTICLE 4 : 
To see if the Town will vote, pursuant to Chapter 41, Section 108 of the General Laws to 
determine the salaries of several elective Town Officers, July 1, 2026, to June 30, 2027; or to take any 
other action relative thereto.  
Request by the Select Board 
Moderator 
 
 
 
$500 
Town Clerk 
 
 
 
$86,572.50 
Select Board member (each)     
$2,500 
Assessor (each)               
 
$1,500 
Board of Health member (each) 
$900 
 
 
ARTICLE 5: 
To see if the Town will vote, under the provisions of the General Laws of Massachusetts, 
Chapter 41, §108, or any amendments thereto, to fix the salaries of all elected officials for Fiscal Year 
2027, and raise and appropriate any sum or sums therefore, and further raise and appropriate any sum 
or sums of money for the maintenance of the several departments of the Town, and for other necessary 
charges, in accordance with the amount recommended by the Finance Committee as shown in the final 
column of the Omnibus Budget as set forth below; or to take any other action relative thereto. 
 
Request by the Finance Committee 
 
This Article advances the Operating Budget for the Town for the Fiscal Year that begins on July 1 st.   
 
 
 

===== PAGE 20 =====
 
 
 
 
19 | P a g e 
 
 
ARTICLE 6: 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the current Zoning By-Law and Zoning Map 
of the Town of East Bridgewater by adopting a new Section 16 with the related map as 
follows; or to take any other action relative thereto. 
Request by the Select Board 
Section 16: North Bedford Street Housing Overlay District (NBSHOD) 
 
A.  
Purpose 
 
The purpose of the North Bedford Street Housing Overlay District (NBSHOD) is to allow single and 
multi-family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts 
General Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as of right single and multi-family housing to 
accomplish the following purposes: 
 
1. 
To provide an option for smaller lot single family residences with a goal of providing 
more reasonable cost smaller single-family homes. 
2. 
To provide an option for smaller lot duplex residential homes with a goal of providing 
more reasonable cost homes. 
3. 
To provide options for larger scale multifamily residential housing with a goal of 
providing more reasonable cost housing options. 
4. 
To offer mixed use development to foster both walkable neighborhoods in conjunction 
with more reasonable cost housing. 
 
B.  
Establishment and Applicability 
 
This NBSHOD consists of an overlay district having a total land area of approximately 116.15 acres in 
size that is superimposed over the underlying zoning district (s) and is shown on the Zoning Map. 
 
1. 
Applicability of NBSHOD. An applicant may develop single and multi-family 
housing located within a NBSHOD in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
2. 
Underlying Zoning. The NBSHOD is an overlay district superimposed on 
underlying zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions 
of the Zoning Bylaw governing the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, 
except for uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the NBSHOD. Uses that are not identified in 
Section 16 are governed by the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s). 
 
 

===== PAGE 21 =====
 
20 | P a g e 
 
 
C.   
Definitions. 
 
For purposes of this Section 16, the following definitions where applicable shall apply. 
 
1. 
Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction  
recorded in its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or 
household of a specified income, or both. 
 
2. 
Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this  
Section 16. 
 
3. 
Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit,  
Site Plan Review, or Special Permit. 
 
4.  
 Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan  
statistical region that includes the Town of East Bridgewater, as defined by the U.S.  
 
     
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
 
 
5. 
As of Right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of 
application  without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other 
discretionary zoning approval. 
 
 
6. 
Building coverage. The maximum area of the lot that can be attributed to the footprint 
of the buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building Coverage does not include surface 
parking. 
 
 
7. 
Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time. 
 
 
8. 
DHCD. The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development, or 
any successor agency. 
 
 
9. 
Development standards. Provisions of Section 16 G. General Development Standards 
made applicable to projects within the NBSHOD. 
 
10. 
EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities, 
DHCD's successor agency. 
 
 
11. 
Lot. An area of land with definite boundaries that is used or available for use as the site 
of a building or buildings. 
 
12. 
MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
 
13. 
Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and non-
residential uses, including, commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses. 
 
14. 
Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two 
or more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building. 
 

===== PAGE 22 =====
 
 
 
 
21 | P a g e 
 
 
15. 
Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay 
district, in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right. 
 
16. 
Open space. Contiguous undeveloped land within a parcel boundary. 
 
17. 
Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple 
stories; a vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or a vehicle 
parking area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has a parking surface at 
least eight feet below grade. Structured Parking does not include surface parking or carports, including 
solar carports. 
 
18. 
Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. 
A solar panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a built structure 
for the purposes of this definition. 
 
19. 
Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living 
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking. 
and sanitation. 
 
20. 
Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
 
21. 
Site plan review authority.  The Planning Board shall be the Site Plan Review Authority 
under Section 16. 
 
22. 
Special permit granting authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall include 
the Planning Board or zoning administrators as designated by the Zoning for the issuance of special 
permits. 
 
23. 
Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units 
maintained by EOHLC used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate income housing for 
the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law. 
 
24. 
Transit station. An MBTA subway station, commuter rail station, or ferry terminal. 
 
25. 
Commuter rail station. Any MBTA commuter rail station with year-round, rather than 
intermittent, seasonal, or event-based, service. 
 
26. 
Ferry terminal. The location where passengers embark and disembark from regular, 
year-round MBTA ferry service. 
 
27. 
Subway station. Any of the stops along the MBTA Red Line, Green Line, Orange Line, 
or Blue Line. 
 
D.  
Permitted Uses 
 
1.  
Uses Permitted As of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the 
NBSHOD. 
 

===== PAGE 23 =====
 
22 | P a g e 
 
 
a. 
Single-family housing; 
b. 
Multi-family housing; 
 
2. Uses Permitted by Special Permit. The following uses and accessory uses require 
 a Special Permit from the Planning Board. 
 
a.              Mixed-use development. As of right uses in a mixed-use development are as  
follows: 
 
GROUND FLOOR 
Community space 
Educational uses. 
Personal services. 
Retail. 
Experiential retail, including retail associated with dance or
 
exercise 
studios, 
music studios, photography studios, or other combination of 
education, services, and retail. 
Restaurant, cafe, and other eating establishments without a drive-through 
and having a maximum of seventy-five (75) seats. 
Office, professional office, medical and dental offices, and co-working 
space 
Artists' studios, maker space, and small-scale food production ([no more 
than 5,000 SF), and retail associated with each use. 
ANY FLOOR 
Residential (required component). 
 
3.  
Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to any of the 
permitted uses in Section D.1. 
a.  
Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an above-
ground or underground parking garage or other building on the same lot as the principal use. 
 
b.  
Any use meeting the definition of “Accessory Use” under the terms of the Zoning By-
Laws of the Town of East Bridgewater. 
E.  
Dimensional Standards 
 
1. 
Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this 
Zoning, the dimensional requirements applicable in the NBSHOD are as follows: 
