
===== PAGE 1 =====
The MBTA Communities and Freetown: Frequently Asked Questions 
 
1.​ What is the MBTA Communities Act? 
 
The MBTA Communities Act was signed into law in 2021 by then-Governor Charlie Baker, 
with the intention of creating more reasonably-priced homes near transit. 
 
The law requires every one of the 177 communities that are served by or adjacent to 
the MBTA transit system to allow property owners the option to build small-scale 
multifamily housing in at least one area. 
 
Once fully implemented, the law is expected to create roughly 40,000 homes--making it 
a key strategy in realizing Massachusetts’ goal of creating 222,000 homes by 2035 to 
stabilize housing prices. 
 
 
2.​ Why was the MBTA Communities Act Passed? 
 
The MBTA Communities Act is intended to be a step towards alleviating Massachusetts’ 
Housing shortage of approximately 222,000 homes.  
 
Since the 1990s, Massachusetts has had a very slow rate of home production, leading 
demand for housing to exceed supply, which creates high prices. In particular, 
Massachusetts has built very few duplexes, town homes, triple-deckers, and other kinds 
of mid-sized multifamily housing since the 1990s, which tend to be more 
reasonably-priced housing types. 
 
 
 
While there are many reasons for this slowdown in housing production, the one that 
builders have identified to be the most important is Massachusetts’ highly restrictive 
zoning regulations. Many communities in Eastern Massachusetts require lots of a half 
acre or more for each home, and the majority ban all other housing types besides 
single family homes on 80% of their land.  Right now, property owners are permitted to 

===== PAGE 2 =====
construct buildings that include four or more homes on only four percent of the land in 
Massachusetts. 
 
This law will create more opportunities to build homes by asking communities to loosen 
these zoning restrictions and allow the construction of mid-sized multifamily housing. 
 
 
3.​ What are the consequences of Massachusetts’ Housing shortage? 
 
High demand for housing and limited supply have caused home prices in Greater 
Boston to skyrocket by 86% since 2015, while rents have grown by 47%. That means the 
minimum household income required to afford a moderately priced home in Greater 
Boston is now over $220,00, while the income needed for a median apartment is over 
$110,000. For comparison, the median household of two in Freetown earns only 
$96,000. 
 
These high prices are causing many young, middle-class people to leave the state in 
search of more affordable housing. A 2023 study by the Greater Boston Chamber of 
Commerce found that 1 in 4 young people (ages 20-30) plan to leave the region within 
the next 5 years. Cost of rent and ability to buy a home were the #1 and #3 cited 
reasons for moving.  
 
 
 
Those leaving Massachusetts are more likely to have college degrees and be middle 
income, meaning that the people most likely to power Massachusetts’ economy in the 
future are leaving to other states–a prospect that has alarmed many business leaders. 
 
Additionally, high home prices and a shortage of smaller units have made it difficult for 
many seniors to downsize, and make it challenging for teachers, first responders, and 

===== PAGE 3 =====
small business owners to live in the communities that they serve. 
 
 
4.​ What does it mean to change zoning? 
 
Zoning is a rulebook for how property owners can use their land. Every municipality has 
its own zoning code, which determines: 
 
●​ Allowable uses (residential, commercial, industrial, open space, etc) 
●​ The shape and scale of buildings that owners are permitted to build  (height, 
size, floor area ratio) 
●​ The distance between different types of uses (i.e. how close can a factory be to 
housing?) 
●​ Requirements for things like parking, affordable housing, open space, historic 
preservation, and more 
 
The MBTA Communities Act asks towns to create a multifamily overlay district, which 
leaves the existing zoning in place, and gives property owners the additional option to 
build multifamily housing. 
 
Property owners are not required to take any action as a result of inclusion in a 
multifamily overlay district. Owners can continue using their land as they have been, 
and are not required to make any changes. 
 
If a property was occupied by a single family home before being included in an 
overlay district, the owner can maintain it as a single family home forever.  Similarly, 
if a property was occupied by a shop and a dentists’ office, the owner can continue 
using the land in those ways. Placing a property into a multifamily overlay district 
simply gives the owner additional flexibility to build multifamily housing if they 
choose to do so. 
 
 
5.​ What kind of housing is the MBTA Communities Act intended to create? 
 
By asking towns to permit projects of up to 15 units per acre, the MBTA Communities 
Act is intended to encourage the creation of “missing middle” housing types that fall 
between single family homes and mid-rise apartment buildings. These housing types 
include townhomes, duplexes, triple-deckers, and small apartment buildings. 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
These homes are intended to benefit middle-class people who do not have incomes low 
enough to qualify for deed-restricted affordable housing, but who cannot afford the 
$656,000 median sale price for a single family home in Freetown. 
 
6.​ What power does the Town of Freetown have to shape projects built in 
Multifamily Overlay Districts? 
 
While Freetown is required to designate one area of town where property owners will 
be allowed to build multifamily housing, the Town has significant flexibility in deciding 
the shape and scale of new buildings.  
 
In writing its multifamily zoning bylaw, the town has the ability to regulate the 
allowable heights and shapes of new buildings, as well as how much of lots new 
buildings are allowed to fill, and how far buildings must be from property lines. The 
town can also decide how much parking should be required for each home, and 
whether new homes must be screened from other properties by fences or vegetation. 
 
Additionally, once the town has approved its multifamily zoning bylaw, it will still have 
the ability to influence the design of projects through the site plan review process. 
While multifamily housing will be “by right” in the multifamily overlay district–meaning 
that the town will not be able to deny projects that comply with all zoning 
regulations–the planning board will be able to request reasonable changes through site 
plan review. 
 
Through the site plan review process, the Planning Board can request changes to the 
architectural design of buildings and the layout of driveways, parking, and structures. 
The Planning Board can also ensure that the proposals meet all regulations for health, 
safety, and the state sanitary code. If proposals violate the zoning bylaw or health and 
safety regulations, the Planning Board has the ability to deny them through the site 
plan review process.  
 
7.​ How will adopting this plan affect municipal finances? 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
If Freetown does not comply with the MBTA Communities Act, it risks losing state grant 
funds and legal fees in defending against likely legal action from the State. The Town of 
Milton spent over $300,000 defending itself from a lawsuit from the Attorney General 
when it sought to avoid complying with the law.  
 
Economic impact analyses commissioned by other towns seeking to comply with the 
MBTA Communities Act have found that new housing development would be positive 
for municipal finances. The towns of Milton, Mansfield, Medfield, and West Newbury 
have commissioned economic impact analyses that have all found that complying with 
the MBTA Communities Act would have a positive impact on their municipal finances. 
This is because the revenue from property taxes and excise taxes paid by potential new 
residents would outweigh any costs that municipalities would incur in providing 
services to them. 
 
8.​ How could adopting this rezoning plan impact school enrollment? 
 
Seniors and young couples without children are most likely to live in multifamily 
housing, meaning that new multifamily projects tend to house fewer school-aged 
children per unit than single-family homes. Because of this, a recent study from the 
Metropolitan Area Planning Council found that there is no correlation between school 
enrollment and new housing development in Massachusetts.
 
 
Moreover, Freetown faces declining school enrollment, so local schools do have the 

===== PAGE 6 =====
capacity for additional students if needed. 
 
How would this plan impact Freetown’s sewer and water systems? 
 
Freetown is not obligated to pay for sewer and water connections to any new 
developments; such connections would be the responsibility of the developer.  
 
The developer is also responsible for addressing stormwater and for adhering to the 
stormwater regulations. The planning board can ensure that developers meet all 
requirements for water, sewer, and stormwater through the site plan review process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
