
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 18, 2023  4:36 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Grafton
1.2. Community Category
Adjacent community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
776
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
Yes
Description Area
Although there is an MBTA commuter rail station within its municipal
boundaries, this municipality's community category is Adjacent. This is
because the methodology used to determine community category
considers not only whether a station is located within municipal boundaries,
but also whether that station has at least 100 acres of "developable station
area" within the boundaries. Section 1 of the Guidelines provides definitions
of "transit station area", "developable station area", and "developable land"
to explain how this determination was made.&nbsp;
1.5a. Please list MBTA commuter rail
stations that are located within the
municipal boundaries
Grafton Commuter Rail Station - Framingham/Worcester Line

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Fiona Coughlan 
1.7a. Title
Town of Grafton Town Planner
1.7b. Email Address
coughlanf@grafton-ma.gov
1.7c. Phone Number
(508) 839-5335 ext. 1402
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Evan  Brassard
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
30 Providence Road
Grafton, MA 01519
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
brassarde@grafton-ma.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
The Town Planner, the Planning Board, and the Central MA Regional
Planning Commission.
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
Established housing-related goals and strategies from the 2001
Comprehensive Master Plan:
Create a station district. Completed: The North Grafton Transit Village
study was completed in 2017 and resulted in the creation of the North
Grafton Transit Village Overlay District (NGTVOD), a 40R district. It is
adjacent to the MBTA station, and there is now a mixed-use project
underway that includes over 300 units of multi-family housing.
Pursue enactment of a mill village mixed-use amendment to the zoning
by-law. Completed: four Village Mixed Use (VMU) zoning districts have
been created, including one adjacent to MBTA station. The districts
encourage multi-family development with or without associated commercial
development, allowing multi-family by right up to a density that varies
among the districts.
Allow townhouses in villages. This has been done to the extent of
encouraging townhouses in VMU districts.
Increase affordable housing by using set-asides. Completed: The
Fisherville Mill Smart Growth Overlay District and the NGTVOD require a
minimum number of affordable units in new development and a deed
restriction filed with the registry of deeds.
Continue to encourage flexible development. Completed. The Town
supports flexible development or "cluster development" via a Special Permit
in the agricultural, R-20, R-40, and Residential Multifamily districts in town.
This promotes housing density and the preservation of open space.
Established housing-related goals and strategies from the 2018 Housing
Production Plan:
Pursue mixed-use and transit-oriented development. This strategy is
reflected in the creation of the NGTVOD, Fisherville Mill Overlay, and VMU
districts noted above.
Review 40B Comprehensive Permit Proposals. There continues to be a
process involving many Town parties, including the Affordable Housing
Trust, Town Planner, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Town Administrator, and
ZBA. The process ensures sound development and the upholding of state
affordability standards.
Other planning includes the Route 30/Westboro Road Corridor Study, the
North Grafton Transit Village Master Plan, the Housing Trust Action Plan,
and a Low Impact Development Study. Each has been implemented to the
extent feasible since publication, and major recommendations are reflected
in recent amendments to the Town's Zoning Bylaw.

===== PAGE 4 =====
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
An update of the Comprehensive Master Plan is currently underway.
Housing will be a major part of that. An update of the Housing Production
Plan is currently underway. The Town recently wrote a letter of support to
the Central MA Regional Planning Commission for the creation of a
Regional Housing Coordinator position.
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
a. An existing zoning district or districts that might already comply with the
Section 3A Guidelines
b. An existing zoning district or districts that must be amended to comply
with the Section 3A Guidelines
c. A new 40R or other overlay zoning district
d. A new base zoning district or districts
3.1a. Please identify and briefly describe
the possibly-compliant district(s),
including any characteristics of existing
development or transit options that
make it suitable for use as this
community's 3A-compliant district.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents.
Both the NGTVOD and the Fisherville Mill Smart Growth Overlay Districts
are 40R districts, meaning they foster a range of housing opportunities and
transit-oriented development, with mixed-use development that promotes
compact design, preservation of open space, and a variety of transportation
options, and enhanced pedestrian access to employment and nearby
systems. The NGTVOD has the Grafton Commuter Rail Stop, and the
Fisherville Overlay is serviced by the Worcester Regional Transit Authority
(WRTA).
3.1b. Please select the changes that
may be necessary for the existing
district to comply. Optional: Attach any
supporting documents that describe
this district.
District boundaries
Use schedule
Dimensional regulations
Parking requirements

===== PAGE 5 =====
Explanation:
The Chapter 43D Priority Development Overlay District (PDD) does not
currently allow for housing, only commercial and industrial underlying uses.
Dimensional regulations and parking requirements would need to be
established to accommodate. There are other, more favorable, options to
consider. The Campus Development Overlay does not currently allow for
housing, only commercial, industrial, and research and development uses.
Dimensional regulations and parking requirements would need to be
established to accommodate. There are other, more favorable, options to
consider.
The existing Residential Multi-Family (RMF) district would need to be
amended to comply in terms of use schedule and dimensional regulations.
Probable changes would be allowing multi-family units by right, up to the
limits established in the 3A regulations. Currently all multi-family units in
RMF require a special permit. If completed, parking parameters would need
to be amended to allow for density and transit-oriented options. However,
we would probably not choose to amend the entire RMF district to comply.
The four Village Mixed-Use districts (VMU) can be amended to comply by
increasing the number of multi-family units allowed by right in a mixed-use
development; we have not fully investigated this yet. This would ultimately
affect parking and require modifications to promote walkability and density.
Other options include removing the special permit requirement for: (1)
multifamily without mixed-use; and (2) multifamily in excess of 8 units per
acre for parcels less than 2 acres and within an existing structure(s), not to
exceed 16 units per acre. These options must be considered more strongly
by the Board and have not been fully investigated yet.
3.1c. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work the community has
already done for this district(s).
We may consider a new overlay or 40R, probably on top of some existing
RMF or at Centech Park, allowing multi-family by right. Based on activity in
North Grafton near the commuter rail station, a new overlay or 40R in that
area would be preferable. We are not prepared to describe definitively
where we might create new base or overlay districts. We expect to consider
such in conjunction with our master plan update.
3.1d. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work this community
has already done for this district.
We may consider new base districts, converting existing RMF or possibly
other residential to a new district allowing multi-family by right. We are not
prepared to describe where or how we might create new base districts. We
expect to consider such in conjunction with our master plan update.
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Walkability/pedestrian access, affordability, mixed-use, transit-oriented
development, accessibility, street tree canopy, and municipal services.
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline

===== PAGE 6 =====
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Public outreach
Jan 31, 2023
Sep 01, 2023
Short Answer
Developing zoning
Aug 01, 2023
Dec 31, 2023
Short Answer
Applying DHCD's compliance model to test for density and unit capacity
Aug 01, 2023
Dec 31, 2023
Short Answer
Holding planning board hearings
Nov 01, 2022
Oct 31, 2024
Short Answer
Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant zoning
Oct 01, 2024
Oct 31, 2024
Short Answer
Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Nov 01, 2024
