
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Town of Halifax, MA 
Board of Selectmen 
Board of Selectmen 
John Bruno, Chair 
Jonathan Selig, Vice Chair  
Thomas Pratt, Clerk 
Cody Haddad 
Town Administrator 
Pamela McSherry 
Executive Assistant 
499 Plymouth Street, Halifax, MA 02338 
Office: (781) 294-1316 
Fax: (781) 294-7684 
Selectmen@halifax-ma.org 
www.halifax-ma.org/Selectmen 
 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) About the MBTA Zoning Requirement 
for Halifax: 
 
1. What is the MBTA Communities Zoning Requirement? 
A. The MBTA Communities Act was adopted in January 2021.  It was passed by broad bipartisan 
majorities in the legislature.  Governor Baker signed the Act into law on January 14, 2021.  The 
MBTA Communities Act requires 177 Cities and Towns to establish “at least 1 district of 
reasonable size in which multi-family housing is permitted as of right.”  Where possible, the 
district must be within a half mile from public transportation (commuter rail, bus station, ferry 
terminal or subway). MBTA Communities must permit the development of housing suitable for 
families with children, and may not impose age restrictions, within the district. 
 
2. Is Compliance with the Law Mandatory? 
A. The law states that the 177 communities covered by the MBTA Communities Law “shall have a 
zoning ordinance or bylaw that provides for at least 1 district of reasonable size” that permits 
multi-family housing as of right. The Attorney General’s Office has also issued an advisory on 
this issue, which is available here. 
 
3. What happens if the Town fails to adopt zoning that would bring us into compliance by 
the 12/31/2024 Deadline? 
A. Communities that fail to comply with the MBTA Communities Act will automatically lose 
certain state funding, including funding: for local infrastructure generally, such as road, bridge, 
water and sewer improvements (known as MassWorks); for local infrastructure projects that 
support housing (known as HousingWorks); for EOHLC grants to communities with a “Housing 
Choice” designation; and state funding under the Local Capital Projects Fund.  The Town of 
Halifax issued a memorandum on the potential funding impact in our community that can be 
found here.  The recently approved “Mass Leads Act” states that communities are required to be 
in compliance with Chapter 40A, Section 3A in order to be eligible for much of the funding in 
this economic development bill.  The full bill can be read here.  
In addition, intentional or persistent non-compliance may result in an enforcement action against 
the municipality by the Attorney General.  Any such action would seek a court order requiring 
the community to comply with the law.  Such a lawsuit is currently pending in the state supreme 
court against the Town of Milton.  
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
4. What is the financial impact on the Town if we were to lose this grant funding?  Would 
this cost the residents more on their tax bills? 
A. The true financial impact is not yet known as we are unsure of exactly which grants would be 
lost if Town does not come into compliance.  While many grants allow the Town to implement 
efficiencies and better serve our community, there are many other grants that aid our operating 
budget.  If those grants are lost, projects will either not be completed, or funds will have to be 
rerouted and could result in service cuts to the community.  Without a proposition 2 ½ override 
approved by the residents of Halifax, taxes cannot be increased beyond the annual allowable 
amount to supplement the lost grant funds. 
 
5. If the Town does not come into compliance and faces legal action from the Attorney 
General, what will that cost be? 
A. The only community facing legal action from the Attorney General at this time is the Town of 
Milton.  This case has risen to the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court and has cost Milton 
several hundred thousand dollars.  The Town of Halifax does not have the flexibility within its 
legal budget to bear a case such as this and if that were to occur, service cuts may be necessary to 
provide more funding within our legal budget. 
 
6. Of the 177 communities, how many are in compliance with this law? 
A.  As of November 22, 2024, 102 communities have adopted zoning that will allow for 
compliance.  Twenty communities have rejected compliance, and 55 communities are still 
working on compliance. 
 
7. Where is the proposed Zoning Overlay District? 
A. The proposed overlay district is made up of four parcels within the Town of Halifax.  Three of 
these parcels make up the Twin Lakes Condominium Complex and the Fourth parcel is known as 
the Halifax Garden Company which directly abuts the Commuter Rail Station.  The proposed 
district does not include any single-family home parcels.  The full text and map of the proposed 
MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District can be found here, in the Special Town 
Meeting Warrant.  
 
8. If this is approved at the Special Town Meeting on December 16th, how many units will 
be built and what will be the impact on our community? 
A. The law does not require that any units actually be built.  Instead, the law requires that the Town 
has zoning that allows multi-family housing as of right.  The zoning must allow for 750 total 
units, but what actual gets built is unknown.  With the current Twin Lakes Condominium 
complex occupying approximately 147+/- acres of the total 194+/- acres in the proposed overlay 
district, that leaves approximately 47+/- acres that could be developed.  It is important to note 
that of that acreage, only 11+/- acres is considered potentially developable as the remainder is 
wetlands.   
Considering there is no project before the Town, we cannot speculate what the impact on our 
Town would be.  As with any development within Town, any development within the proposed 
overlay district would be required to pay taxes on the assessed value of their property.  Any 
utilities provided by the Town such as water or solid waste would also require payment to the 
Town for these services. 
