
===== PAGE 18 =====
18 
 
Housing Inventory, and comply  with the provisions of 760 CMR 56.00, as may 
be amended. The Planning Board shall review and approve the actual percentage 
distribution of qualifying low versus moderate income units. 
 
(If (d) above is found to be satisfied, in the opinion of Planning Board, it may authorize 
a 3 unit per acre increase over 5% increase in applicable base density.) 
 
 
Mr. Clark agreed to the change, and this friendly amendment was accepted by the Planning 
Board.  
 
A friendly amendment was made by Alice Von Loesecke, 84 Warren Avenue and seconded, to strike 
the first sentence within Section C. (Requirements and process for approval), Subsection 1 
(Submittal requirements), (J)-[5].  
 
(j) 
Site Development Climate Mitigation Narrative. All features which are sustainable 
and designed to help mitigate climate impact should be included in this plan. This 
plan should specifically address, but not be limited to, the following areas. 
 
 
[1]. Heating and Cooling. How the development will be heated and cooled. The 
plans to use heat pumps or a geothermal system to heat and cool the buildings. 
Electrification of all systems and appliances. 
 
 
[2]. Energy Generation. Solar panels should be considered to the maximum 
extent. Include how much power they will provide both in absolute kilowatt-
hours and as a percentage of the total electricity requirements. 
 
 
[3]. Energy Use and Resource Use Minimization. Roofing, insulation and 
windows that minimize heat loss and cooling loss. LED lights should be installed 
in all common areas. Water-saving fixtures should be installed in units as well as 
for landscaping. 
 
 
 
[4]. Parking. EV chargers installed with infrastructure to expand capacity based on 
anticipated growth. Include percentage of the anticipated automobile population 
that will be served by the chargers and the anticipated expansion readiness. 
Parking to be pervious to reduce runoff. 
 
 
[5]. Landscaping. Any trees removed from the site to be replaced with trees of 
equal size or compensated by more trees than removed. Shade trees be planted in 
areas to offset heat from parking areas. Drought-tolerant and native plants to be 
used in the landscaping. 
 
 
The friendly amendment was accepted by the Planning Board.  
 
A motion was made by Lucy Wallace, 18 Orchard Hill, and seconded to move the question. The 
question was so moved. 
 
Vote on Article 3, Main Motion, with all Friendly Amendments: Passed by Two-Thirds 
Majority 

===== PAGE 19 =====
19 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 4: LOCAL OPTION ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX 
 (Majority Vote Required)  
To see if the Town will vote to accept the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 64G, 
Section 3A to impose a local room occupancy excise tax for bed and breakfast establishments, 
hotels, lodging houses, short-term rentals or motels at the rate of six percent, or take any vote or 
votes in relation thereto. 
(Inserted by Select Board) 
 
On a motion by Kara Minar, 204 Still River Road, Select Board and seconded, 
 
I move that the Town accept the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 64G, Section 
3A to impose a local room occupancy excise tax for bed and breakfast establishments, hotels, 
lodging houses, short-term rentals or motels at the rate of six percent effective on the first day of the 
calendar quarter following 30 days after today. 
 
Vote on Article 4, Main Motion: Passed by Majority 
 
 
ARTICLE 5: AMEND GENERAL BYLAW - CHAPTER 78 PERSONNEL        BYLAW  
 (Majority Vote Required) 
To see if the Town will vote to amend Chapter 78 of the Code of the Town of Harvard, Personnel 
Bylaw, by making the following changes, or pass any vote or votes in relation thereto: 
(Inserted by Personnel Board) 
 
[Key to revisions; underlining = additions; strikethrough = deletions] 
 
§ 78-5 Adoption and amendment of personnel policies. 
 
The Select Personnel Board shall promulgate personnel policies, including rules and regulations, 
defining the rights, benefits and obligations of employees subject to this bylaw. Policies shall be 
adopted or amended as follows: 
A. Preparation of policies. The Personnel Board shall prepare policies or amendments to 
policies. Any member of the Select Board, Personnel Board, the Executive Secretary Town 
Administrator, or any three employees may suggest policies for consideration by the 
Personnel Board. The Personnel Board need not consider any proposal already considered in 
the preceding 12 months. Any person proposing a new or amended policy shall provide the 
substance and the reason for the proposed policies or amendments. Any proposed policies or 
amendments shall be posted at least five days prior to the public hearing in prominent work 
locations; copies of all proposals shall be provided to representatives of each employee 
collective bargaining unit, and a copy shall be submitted to the Select Board Town 
Administrator. 
B. 
Public hearing. The Personnel Board shall present the proposed policy(ies) or amendment(s), 
the purpose of the proposal, and the implication of any proposed change at the public 
hearing. Any person may attend the hearing, speak and present information. Within 31 days 

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 
 
after such public hearing the Personnel Board shall consider the proposed policies and may 
vote to recommend that the Select Board Town Administrator adopt the policies, (with or 
without modifications), reject the policies, or indicate that further study is necessary. 
C. 
Recommended policies. The Personnel Board shall transmit recommendations in writing to 
the Select Board Town Administrator within 20 days of any vote on proposed personnel 
policies or amendments. The recommendations from the Personnel Board shall contain the 
text of the proposed policy or amended policy, an explanation of the policy and the 
implications of the policy. The Select Board Town Administrator shall only consider 
proposals with a recommendation of the Personnel Board, unless the Personnel Board fails to 
provide a recommendation within 20 days, and may adopt, reject or return recommendations 
for further action to the Personnel Board. Policies shall become effective upon approval of 
the Select Board Town Administrator , unless some other date is specified. 
D. Computation of time. In computing time (days) under this bylaw only Town Hall working 
days shall be counted. 
 
§ 78-6 Problem resolution. 
A. Employees are encouraged to bring any problems or complaints to their respective 
supervisor or appointing authority regarding their work or other day-to-day 
relations with the Town. 
B. 
If an employee has a request or problem, it should be first discussed with the immediate 
supervisor or appointing authority. 
C. 
If this conference fails to clear up any question to the satisfaction of the employee, the 
employee y he may refer the matter in writing to the appropriate appointing authority. The 
appointing authority shall then discuss the matter with the parties and attempt to reach a 
satisfactory understanding and solution of the problem. 
D. If two weeks have elapsed since the submission of the matter in writing to the appointing 
authority and the dispute is still unresolved, either party may appeal to the Personnel Board. 
This Board shall take the question under advisement, collecting such facts relating thereto as 
it may deem helpful, and it may, in its discretion, hold private or public hearings with respect 
to such question. Not later than 30 days after receipt of written submission of the matter to 
it, the Personnel Board shall render its decision and thereafter promptly take such action as 
may be necessary and authorized hereunder relative to the dispute. If the decision rendered 
by the Personnel Board is considered unsatisfactory to either party, then final appeal may be 
made to the Select Board Town Administrator.  
 
§ 78-7 Employee benefits. This section in its entirety has been moved to the Personnel 
Policies and Procedures  
All employee benefits shall be defined in the Personnel Policies and Procedures.  
The benefits for employees covered by this bylaw shall include but not be limited to the following: 
A. 
Paid Time Off (PTO). Regular Benefit eligible employees scheduled for 20 hours or more 
each week are entitled to paid time off each year based on the amount of continuous service 
originating with the date of hire using the following schedule, which is prorated for employee’s 
scheduled for 20 hours or more each week: [Amended 3-27-1999 ATM by Art. 32; 10-10-2007 STM 
by Art. 10]  
Years of Service 
PTO  
(days)  
