
===== PAGE 18 =====
 
 
penalty and shall forward said statement of lien to the Tax Collector who shall cause said 
statement(s) to be recorded in the Worcester District Registry of Deeds. 
 
Section 6.  Unpaid Municipal Charges Liens. 
       a) If a charge, fine, penalty or fee secured by the lien is unpaid when the Assessors are preparing 
the real estate tax list and warrant, the Tax Collector shall certify the charge or penalty to the 
Assessors’ Department and the Assessors shall add the charge or fee to the next property tax bill to 
which it relates, and commit it with the warrant to the collector as part of the tax. 
        b) If the property to which the charge, fine, penalty and/or fee relates is tax exempt, the charge 
or fee shall be committed as a tax on said property. 
 
Section 7.  Release of Lien. The Municipal Charges Lien may be discharged by filing a certificate 
from the Tax Collector that all municipal charges or fees constituting a lien, together with any 
interests and: costs have been paid or legally abated. All costs of recording or discharging a lien 
under this section shall be borne by the owner of the property. 
 
On a motion by Richard Maiore, 50 Slough Road, Select Board and seconded, 
 
I move that the Town amend the Code of the Town by adding thereto Chapter 58, Municipal 
Charges Lien, as printed on pages 50 and 51 of the Finance Committee Report and Warrant for the 
2024 Annual Town Meeting, except that: 
(1) in Section 5, subsection a) the word “of” shall be deleted; (2) in Section 5, subsection b) the word 
“fees” shall be inserted between the words “and” and “that”; and (3) in  
the first sentence of Section 7, the colon shall be deleted.   
 
A friendly amendment was made by Benjamin Guthro, 13 Fairbank Street, and seconded to insert at 
the end of the sentence following Section 3. Charge and/or Fee., the words and figure, “which 
exceed $2,500”. 
 
Section 3. Charge and/or Fee.  The Municipal Charges Lien shall apply to the following municipal 
charges and/or fees which exceed $2,500: 
       a) Charges, penalties, fines or fees, including interest and all costs to record said lien(s) in the 
Worcester District Registry of Deeds, for violations of the Town of Harvard Protective Bylaw.  
       b) Charges, penalties, fines or fees, including interest and all costs to record said lien(s) in the 
Worcester District Registry of Deeds, for violations of the Town of Harvard general bylaws relating 
to Alarm Systems, Alcoholic Beverages, Animal Control/Dogs, Bare Hill Pond, Canvassers and 
Solicitors, Firearms and Explosives, Historic Districts, House Numbering, Scenic Roads, Streets and 
Sidewalks, Stretch Energy Code, Water Usage and Wetlands Protection.  
 
The friendly amendment was not accepted by the Select Board. Mr. Guthro asked that this 
change be offered as an un-friendly amendment. 
 
A motion was made by Mary Cutler, 56 Stow Road, and seconded to move the question. The 
question was so moved. (266 In-Favor, 21 Opposed) 
 
Vote on Amendment to Article 21: Failed to Pass by Two-Thirds Majority (76 In-Favor, 195 
Opposed) 
 
Vote on Article 21, Main Motion: Passed by Majority (160 In-Favor, 125 Opposed) 

===== PAGE 19 =====
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 22: AMEND CHAPTER 125, PROTECTIVE BYLAW, of the CODE of 
HARVARD by ADDING SECTION 125-60: MBTA COMMUNITIES MULTI-FAMILY 
OVERLAY DISTRICT 
(Two-Thirds Majority Vote Required) 
 
To see if the Town will vote to amend Chapter 125, Protective Bylaw, of the Town Code by adding 
the following section,  125-60: MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District, or take any vote 
or votes in relation thereto.  
(Inserted by Planning Board) 
 
 
§ 125-60: MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District  
 
A. Purpose  
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multi-
family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General 
Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as of right multi-family housing to accomplish the 
following purposes:  
 
1. Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and typologies to provide equal access to 
new housing throughout the community for people with a variety of needs and income levels;  
 
2. Support vibrant neighborhoods by encouraging an appropriate mix and intensity of uses to 
support an active public space that provides equal access to housing, jobs, gathering spaces, 
recreational opportunities, goods, and services with reasonable proximity to a transit station; 
 
3. Preserve open space and viable agricultural land in the community by locating new housing within 
or adjacent to existing developed areas and infrastructure; 
 
4. Help implement Master Plan goals, the Housing Production Plan and the Ayer Road Vision Plan.  
 
B. Establishment and Applicability  
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately eight (8) acres in size that is 
superimposed over the underlying zoning district (s) and is shown on the Zoning Map.  
 
1. Applicability of MCMOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within a 
MCMOD in accordance with the provisions of this § 125-60.  
 
2. Underlying Zoning. The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying zoning 
districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing 
the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, as well as for uses allowed as of 
right or by special permit in the MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in §125-60 are governed by 
the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).  
 

===== PAGE 20 =====
 
 
C. Definitions  
For purposes of this §125-60, the following definitions shall apply.  
 
1. Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded in its 
chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or household of a 
specified income, or both.  
 
2. Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this § 125-60. 
 
3. Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site Plan 
Review, or Special Permit.  
 
4. Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan statistical region 
that includes the Town of Harvard as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD).  
 
5. As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of application 
without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary 
zoning approval.  
 
6. Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts Under 
Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time.  
 
7. EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities, or any 
successor agency.  
 
8. Development standards. Provisions of § 125-60 G. General Development Standards made 
applicable to projects within the MCMOD.  
 
9. Lot Coverage. The maximum area of a lot covered by impervious surfaces, including the 
footprint of buildings, parking, sidewalks, patios, and decks. 
 
10. MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.  
 
11. Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and non-residential 
uses, including, commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses.  
 
12. Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or more 
buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building.  
 
13. Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay district, in 
which multi-family housing is allowed as of right.  
 
14. Open space. Contiguous undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or man-
made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other within resources 
within a parcel boundary. 
 
15. Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple stories; 
a vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or a vehicle parking 

===== PAGE 21 =====
 
 
area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has a parking surface at least eight 
feet below grade. Structured Parking does not include surface parking or carports, including solar 
carports.  
 
16. Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. A solar 
panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a built structure for 
the purposes of this definition.  
 
17. Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for 
one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking. and 
sanitation.  
 
18. Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act.  
 
19. Site plan review authority. Harvard Planning Board.  
 
20. Special permit granting authority.  (if it were mixed use) Harvard Planning Board  
 
21. Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units 
maintained by EOHLC used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate-income housing 
for the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law.  
 
24. Transit station. The Ayer or Littleton MBTA commuter rail station.  
 
D. Permitted Uses  
1. Uses Permitted As of Right. As many as 120 units of multi-family housing is permitted as of 
right within the MCMOD. 
 
2. Uses Permitted by Special Permit. The following uses require a Special Permit from the 
Harvard Planning Board. 
 
a. Mixed-use development. Uses in a mixed-use development are as follows:  
Ground Floor  
125-12 Small Scale Commercial uses 
125-13A Medical or Dental Office 
125-13B Automated teller machine (not a drive-up facility) 
125-13C Personal or business service including barber or beauty salon, shoe repair, tailoring, 
business or trade schools, photocopying, and locksmith 
125-13G Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up station 
125-13H Nursery school, Kindergarten or day-care center for preschool children 
125-13L Catering service, delicatessen or other food market, or a permitted eating establishment 

===== PAGE 22 =====
 
 
Ground Floor  
125-13P Restaurant or other food service establishment whose principal business is the sale of 
prepared foods or beverages that are consumed on the premises or carried out by retail customers. 
Pharmacy 
Recreation, dance, or fitness facility 
Grocery or farm products retail store with less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Any Floor  
Residential (required component).  
 
b. Affordable Ownership Units. More than 120 units of which 25% of the additional units over 
120 units must be affordable at 80% AMI; 
 
c. Affordable Rental Units. Any units in excess of 120 units may be allocated as rental units, of 
which 25% of the additional units over 120 units must be affordable at 80% AMI; A 
sufficient number of units above 120 units must be designated affordable such that at least 
25% of rental units in the development shall be restricted to occupancy by Income Eligible 
Households, earning 80% or less of the area median income, and the window of affordable 
rent will be set at 30% of the 70% median income, to conform with 760 CMR 56.00.  These 
restrictions will enable 100% of the rental units to be included in the Subsidized Housing 
Inventory.   
 
3. Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to any of the  
permitted uses in § 125-60 D.1:  
 
a. Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an above ground or 
underground parking garage, or other building on the same lot as the principal use.  
 
E. Dimensional Standards  
1. Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning, the 
dimensional requirements applicable in the MCMOD are as follows:  
 
Standard 
 
Lot Size 
 
Minimum (SF) 
40,000 
Height 
 
Stories (Maximum) 
3  
Feet (Maximum) 
 45   
Minimum Open Space 
30% 
 

===== PAGE 27 =====
 
 
d. Work to overcome economic segregation allowing Harvard to be a community of opportunity in 
which low and moderate-income households have the opportunity to advance economically.  
 
2. Applicability.  
This requirement is applicable to all residential and mixed-use developments with ten (10) or more 
dwelling units, whether new construction, substantial rehabilitation, expansion, reconstruction, or 
residential conversion (Applicable Projects). No project may be divided or phased to avoid the 
requirements of this section.  
 
3. Affordability requirements. 
All units affordable to households earning 80% or less of AMI created in the MCMOD under this 
section must be eligible for listing on DHCD’s Subsidized Housing Inventory. 
 
4. Provision of Affordable Housing. not fewer than ten percent (10%) of housing units 
constructed shall be Affordable Housing Units. For purposes of calculating the number of units of 
Affordable Housing required within a development project, a fractional unit shall be rounded down 
to the next whole number. The Affordable Units shall be available to households earning income up 
to eighty percent (80%) of the AMI.  
 
5. Development Standards. Affordable Units shall be:  
a. Integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, appearance, 
construction, and quality of exterior and interior materials with the other units and/or lots;  
 
b. Proportionately dispersed throughout the development with respect to location, unit type, quality 
and character, room size, and number and distribution of bedrooms, and in all respects shall be 
indistinguishable from the development’s comparable market-rate dwelling units; 
 
c. Located such that the units have equal access to shared amenities, including light and air, and 
utilities (including any bicycle storage and/or Electric Vehicle charging stations) within the 
development;  
 
d. Located such that the units have equal avoidance of any potential nuisances as market-rate units 
within the development;  
 
e. Distributed proportionately across each phase of a phased development.  
 
f. The dimensional requirements that are set forth in Section E of these bylaws shall apply both to 
the development’s affordable dwelling units and its market-rate dwelling units.     
 
g. Occupancy permits may be issued for market-rate units prior to the end of construction of the 
entire development provided that occupancy permits for Affordable Units are issued simultaneously 
on a pro rata basis. The last Occupancy permit issued shall be for a market-rate unit. 
 
6 Administration.  
a. The Zoning Enforcement Officer/Building Commissioner shall be responsible for administering 
and enforcing the requirements in this section. 
 

===== PAGE 28 =====
 
 
b. Severability: if any provision of this bylaw were determined to be invalid by a court of competent 
jurisdiction, the remainder hereof shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and effect.  The 
invalidity of any provision of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the bylaw. 
 
On a motion by Richard Cabelus, 103 Pinnacle Road, Planning Board and seconded, 
 
I move that the Town amend Chapter 125, Protective Bylaw, of the Town Code by a.) adding 
thereto the new section,  125-60: MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District, printed on 
pages 52 through 61 of the Finance Committee Report and Warrant for the 2024 Annual Town 
Meeting; and b.) amending the Zoning Map referenced in Section 125-42 by adding thereto the 
MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District as shown on the map entitled “Harvard, MA: 
Potential Multi-Family Overlay District”, dated February, 2024 and prepared by the Montachusett 
Regional Planning Commission, a copy of which overlay district map is on file in the Office of the 
Town Clerk.   
 
A motion was made by Robert Douglas, 163 Stow Road, and seconded to move the question. The 
question was so moved. (231 In-Favor, 32 Opposed) 
 
Vote on Article 22, Main Motion: Passed by Two-Thirds Majority (209 In-Favor, 60 
Opposed) 
 
 
ARTICLE 23: GRANT OF EASEMENT to TOWN of LITTLETON 
 
(Two-Thirds Majority Vote Required) 
 
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Select Board to convey to the Town of Littleton an 
easement to construct, install, and maintain utilities for the supply of water in any portion of the 
public way in Harvard being a portion of Littleton County Road extending south from the Littleton 
Town Line to Beaver Brook Road in Boxborough, as shown on the plan set entitled “Town of 
Littleton, Massachusetts, Electric Light and Water Departments, Water Supply Main Extension 
Littleton / Boxborough DWSRF No. 12397”, dated October 2023, prepared by Weston & Sampson 
Engineers, Inc., a copy of which is on file with the Town Clerk, and as may be amended; and further 
to authorize the Select Board to enter into such agreements and execute such documents and 
instruments as may be necessary or convenient to effectuate the purposes of this article; or take any 
other action relative thereto. 
(Inserted by Select Board) 
 
On a motion by Richard Maiore, 50 Slough Road, Select Board and seconded, 
 
I move that the Town authorize the Select Board to convey to the Town of Littleton an easement to 
construct, install, and maintain utilities for the supply of water in any portion of the public way in 
Harvard being a portion of Littleton County Road extending south from the Littleton Town Line to 
Beaver Brook Road in Boxborough, as shown on the plan set entitled “Town of Littleton, 
Massachusetts, Electric Light and Water Departments, Water Supply Main Extension Littleton / 
Boxborough DWSRF No. 12397”, dated March 2024, prepared by Weston & Sampson Engineers, 
Inc., a copy of which is on file with the Town Clerk, and as may be amended; and further to 

===== PAGE 29 =====
 
 
authorize the Select Board to enter into such agreements and execute such documents and 
instruments as may be necessary or convenient to effectuate the purposes of the easement. 
Vote on Article 23, Main Motion: Passed by Two-Thirds Majority (220 In-Favor, 11 
Opposed) 
 
 
ARTICLE 24: CITIZENS PETITION 
 
(Majority Vote Required) 
 
To see if the Town will vote to request that the Select Board delay selling the parcel of land, with the 
building thereon, known and numbered as 39 Massachusetts Avenue, Harvard, Massachusetts and 
described in the deed dated June 2, 1982 and recorded with the Worcester District Registry of Deeds 
in Book 7501, Page 344 (“the Property”), and allow it to continue to be used as a residence for 
refugees, with utilities paid by tenants, in exchange for a monthly payment equal to the monthly cost 
of insurance for the Property and a fair and appropriate rent, for a period of at least five years, or 
pass any vote or votes in relation thereto. 
(Inserted by Citizen Petition) 
 
On a motion by Jason Cole, 67 Warren Avenue, and seconded, 
 
I move in the words of the article. 
 
A motion was made by Lucy Wallace, 18 Orchard Hill, and seconded to move the question. The 
question was so moved. (199 In-Favor, 13 Opposed) 
 
Vote on Article 24, Main Motion: Passed by Majority (166 In-Favor, 30 Opposed) 
 
 
ARTICLE 25: ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OF PROPERTY  
(Majority Vote Required) 
 
To see if the Town will vote to accept gifts of land or interests in land for any municipal purpose, 
and authorize the Select Board to acquire said parcels of land or interests therein so donated or 
purchased by eminent domain for the purpose of confirming and making clear the Town’s title to 
said parcels of land or interests therein, or pass any vote or votes in relation thereto. 
(Inserted by Select Board) 
 
On a motion by Kara Minar, 204 Still River Road, Select Board and seconded, 
 
I move that the Town take no action on this article. 
 
Vote on Article 25, Main Motion: Passed by Majority (147 In-Favor, 4 Opposed) 
 
 
 
