
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning By-Laws by adding Section V-1 
MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District (MCMOD) to allow multi-family 
housing as of right in response to mandated changes to Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
(Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A). 
 
 
Section V-I MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District 
 
1. Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to 
allow multi-family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
(Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning is intended to accomplish the 
following purposes: 
 
• 
Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and typologies to provide 
equal access to new housing throughout the community for households with a 
variety of needs and income levels. 
 
• 
Implement the Holliston Housing Production Plan; 
 
• 
 Locate housing within walking distance of public transit to promote general public 
health, reduce the number of vehicle miles travelled, support economic 
development, and meet community-based environmental goals, including reducing 
greenhouse gases and improving air quality. 
 
• 
Support public investment in public transit and pedestrian- and bile-
friendly infrastructure. 
 
• 
 Increase the municipal tax base through private investment in new 
residential developments. 
 
 
2. Establishment and Applicability 
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 88 acres in size 
that is superimposed over the underlying zoning districts and is shown on the map 
entitled "Town of Holliston- MBTA Subdistricts Location" prepared by JM Goldson 
(dated August 2024). 
 
An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within a MCMOD in accordance 
with the provisions of this Section as of right without the need for a Special Permit, 
Variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary zoning approval. 
 
The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying zoning districts. The 
regulations for use, dimension and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing the 
respective underlying districts shall remain in full force, except for uses allowed as of right 
in the MCMOD. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
Uses that are not identified in Section V-I are governed by the requirements of the 
underlying zoning districts. 
 
The MCMOD is composed of two (2) subdistricts as defined by the Assessor Maps, 
Block, and Parcels below: 
a. Subdistrict 1 - Map 14, Block 4, Parcels 4.1, 154.A-- Sand 232, Map 14, 
Block 4, 
Parcel 1 
b. Subdistrict 2 - Map 5, Block 1, Parcel 21 and Map 5, Block 4, Parcels 22 and 
23.) 
 
3. Definitions 
For purposes of this Section V-I, the following definitions shall apply. Definitions used but 
not included herein shall have the meaning given to them under M.G.L. c. 40A or 
elsewhere in the Town of Holliston Zoning By-Laws.  
 
Affordable Housing Units. A housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded in its 
chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or household 
of a specified income, or both.  
 
Building Coverage. The maximum area of the lot that can attributed to the footprint of a 
building (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building coverage does not include surface 
parking or other impervious area.  
 
Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts Under 
Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time.  
 
DHCD. The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development, or any 
successor agency.  
 
MBTA.  Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.  
 
Multi-Family Housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or 
more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each 
building.  
 
Open Space. A designated area on a lot or within a building (or combination thereof) set 
aside for shared use by residents for gathering, recreation, childcare and other community 
needs. Open Space shall include required minimum setbacks.  
 
 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
4. Permitted Uses 
 
Uses Permitted As of Right 
1. Multi-family housing subject to Site Plan Review per Section VII of the Zoning By-Laws 
and the associated required parking for that use (surface and structured).   
 
Accessory Uses 
1. Professional office, studio nor home occupation up to 200 s.f. with no employees 
and who do not have regular clients/customers come to the office 
 
 
5. Dimensional Standards 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning, the dimensional requirements 
applicable in the MCMOD are as follows: 
 
Maximum Building Height 
40 feet 
Maximum Stories 
3 Stories 
Minimum Lot Size 
10,000 s.f.  
Minimum Frontage 
50 ft 
Maximum Building Coverage 
50% 
Front Yard Setback 
10 ft 
Side Yard Setback 
10 ft 
Rear Yard Setback 
10 ft 
Maximum Units per acre* 
16 
Open Space 
30% 
 Special Permit required for higher density 
 
A. Multiple Buildings on Lots. In the MCMOD, lots may have more than one principal 
building. 
 
B. Exceptions.  
 
• 
Height. The limitation on height shall not apply to chimneys, ventilators, 
towers, silos, spires, or other ornamental features of buildings, which features 
are in no way used for living purposes and do not constitute more than 25% of 
the ground floor area of the building. 
 
• 
Renewable Energy Installations. The Planning Board as Site Plan Review 
Authority may waive the height and setbacks defined in this section to 
accommodate the installation of solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, living and 
other eco-roofs, energy storage, and air-source heat pump equipment. Such 
installations shall not create a significant detriment to abutters in terms of 
noise or shadow and must be appropriately integrated into the architecture of 
the building and the layout of the site. The installations shall not provide 
additional habitable space within the development. 
 
