
===== PAGE 1 =====
16 
Select Board Chair Muriel Kramer _____ 
ZONING BYLAW AMENDMENTS 
ARTICLE: 39   MBTA Communities Zoning Bylaw; Sponsor: Planning Board 
To see if the Town will vote to amend Chapter 210, Zoning Bylaws to insert the following 
language after Article XXXV, Neighborhood Mixed Use District and to amend the Zoning Map to 
include the MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District: 
ARTICLE XXXVI 
MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District (MCMOD) Bylaw 
§ 210-251. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multi-
family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts 
General Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as of right multi-family housing to 
accomplish the following purposes: 
A. Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and typologies to provide equal
access to new housing throughout the community for people with a variety of needs and
income levels.
B. Locate housing within walking distance of public transit and other amenities to promote
general public health, reduce the number of vehicular miles traveled, support economic
development, and meet community-based environmental goals, including reducing
greenhouse gasses and improving air quality.
C. Support and encourage further public investment in public transit and pedestrian- and
bike-friendly infrastructure.
D. Increase the municipal tax base through private investment in new residential
developments.

===== PAGE 2 =====
17 
Select Board Chair Muriel Kramer _____ 
§ 210-252.  Establishment and Applicability. 
 
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 58.4 acres in size that is 
superimposed over the underlying zoning district(s) and is shown on the Zoning Map.  
 
A. Applicability of MCMOD.  
An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within a MCMOD in accordance 
with the provisions of this Article. 
 
B. Subdistricts. 
The MCMOD is composed of two (2) subdistricts, as defined by the Assessor Parcel 
numbers below and shown on the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District 
(MCMOD) Map.  
 
(1) 
Upper Cedar Street Subdistrict  
 
Map R4 Block 8 Lot 0 
Map R4 Block 17 Lot 0  
Map R4 Block 12 Lot 0 
Map R4 Block 20 Lot 0 
 
(2) 
Downtown Subdistrict  
Map U16 Block 80 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 85 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 86 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 86 Lot A 
Map U16 Block 87 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 87 Lot A 
Map U16 Block 88 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 115 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 116 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 117 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 118 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 121 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 124 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 125 Lot 0 
   Map U16 Block 127 Lot 0 
   Map U16 Block 128 Lot 0 
   Map U16 Block 129 Lot 0 
   Map U16 Block 130 Lot 0 
   Map U16 Block 131 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 144 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 145 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 146 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 147 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 148 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 149 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 151 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 152 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 153 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 153 Lot 4 
Map U16 Block 220 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 221 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 222 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 223 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 250 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 254 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 255 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 256 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 257 Lot 0 
 
C. Underlying Zoning.  
The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying zoning districts. The 
regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing 
the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except for uses 
allowed as of right or by special permit in the MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in 
Section 210-254 are governed by the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s). 
 
§ 210-253.  Definitions. 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
Select Board Chair Muriel Kramer ______ 
18 
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply to MCMOD developments.  
Where the definitions contained herein differ from those in MGL 40A, Section 3A, the definitions 
contained in MGL 40A, Section 3A shall be used: 
 
Affordable housing unit. A dwelling unit that qualifies as a Local Initiative Unit under the 
Commonwealth’s Local Initiative Program (760 CMR 45.00) and meets the requirements of 
a subsidized housing unit for purposes of listing in the Subsidized Housing Inventory under 
GL. c.40B §§ 20-23. 
 
Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this Article. 
 
Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site Plan 
Review, or Special Permit. 
 
As-of-right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning Bylaw in place at the time of 
application without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or 
other discretionary zoning approval. 
 
Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts Under 
Section 3A, issued by EOHLC, as they exist on the date of adoption of this bylaw or may be 
revised or amended from time to time. 
 
Dwelling unit.  A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more 
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
 
EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities 
(formerly known as Department of Housing and Community Development, or DHCD), or any 
successor agency. 
 
Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and non-
residential uses, including commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses. 
 
Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or more 
buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building. 
 
Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay district, in 
which multi-family housing is allowed as of right. 
 
Open Space. Open space shall consist of landscaping, naturally vegetated areas, trails, 
and/or shared open areas with permeable hardscape. All open space must be an outdoor 
area on the ground, outside of the building footprints, which is open to the sky and which is 
designed and used for outdoor living and/or recreation and shall not include parking or 
vehicle circulation areas. Vegetated and/or landscaped setbacks may be included as Open 
Space.  
 
Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple 
stories; a vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or a 
vehicle parking area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has a 
parking surface at least eight feet below grade. Structured Parking does not include surface 
parking or carports, including solar carports. 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
Select Board Chair Muriel Kramer ______ 
19 
Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. A 
solar panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a built 
structure for the purposes of this definition. 
 
Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
 
Special permit granting authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall include the 
Select Board, Board of Appeals, or the Planning Board, as designated by the Zoning Bylaw 
for the issuance of special permits. 
 
Sub-district. An area within the MCMOD that is geographically smaller than the MCMOD 
district and differentiated from the rest of the district by use, dimensional standards, or 
development standards. 
 
§ 210-254.  Permitted Uses. 
 
A. Uses Permitted As-of-Right. The following uses are permitted as-of-right within the 
MCMOD. 
 
(1) 
Multi-family housing. 
 
B. Uses Permitted by Special Permit. The following uses require a Special Permit from 
the Planning Board.  
 
(1) 
Mixed-use development. Uses that may be allowed in a mixed-use 
development are as follows: 
a. Ground Floor: Community space; Educational uses; Personal services; 
Retail;  Experiential retail, including retail associated with dance or 
exercise studios, music studios, photography studios, or other 
combination of education, services, and retail; Restaurant, café, and other 
eating establishments without a drive-through; Office, professional office, 
medical and dental offices, and co-working space Artists’ studios, maker 
space, and small-scale food production (no more than 5,000 sf), and retail 
associated with each use.  
 
b. Any Floor: Residential. 
 
C. Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as-of-right to any of the 
by-right or permitted uses in Section 210-254.A or 210-254.B.  
 
(1) 
Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an 
above ground or underground parking garage or other building on the same lot 
as the principal use.  
 
(2) 
Any use meeting the definition of “Accessory Use” under § 210-4 of this 
Chapter. 
 
§ 210-255.  Dimensional Standards. 
 
A. Dimensional Standards.  

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
Select Board Chair Muriel Kramer ______ 
20 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning Bylaw, the dimensional 
requirements applicable in the MCMOD are as follows: 
 
(1) 
Upper Cedar Street Subdistrict 
 
a. Minimum Lot Size:  15,000 square feet.  
 
b. Maximum Height: 40 feet. 
 
c. Minimum Open Space:  30%. 
 
d. Floor Area Ratio:  N/A. 
 
e. Maximum Building Coverage:  45%. 
 
f. Minimum Frontage: 100 feet. 
 
g. Front Yard Setback: 40 feet.  
 
h. Side Yard Setback: 10 feet. 
 
i. 
Rear Yard Setback: 20 feet.  
 
(2) 
Downtown Subdistrict 
 
a. Minimum Lot Size:  5,000 square feet.  
 
b. Maximum Height: 35 feet. 
 
c. Minimum Open Space:  None. 
 
d. Floor Area Ratio:  N/A. 
 
e. Maximum Building Coverage:  75%. 
 
f. Minimum Frontage: 50 feet. 
 
g. Front Yard Setback: 5 feet.  
 
h. Side Yard Setback: 0 feet. 
 
i. 
Rear Yard Setback: 20 feet.  
 
B. Multi-Building Lots. In the MCMOD, lots may have more than one principal building. 
 
C. Exceptions. The limitation on height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, ventilators, 
mechanical equipment, towers, silos, or spires, whose features are in no way used for 
human occupancy and do not constitute more than 25% of the ground floor area (GFA) 
of the building.  
 

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
 
Select Board Chair Muriel Kramer ______ 
24 
(1) 
In a mixed-use building, access to and egress from the residential component 
shall be clearly differentiated from access to other uses. Such differentiation 
may occur by using separate entrances or egresses from the building or within 
a lobby space shared among different uses. 
 
(2) 
Paved pedestrian access from the residential component shall be provided to 
residential parking and amenities and to the public sidewalk, as applicable. 
 
(3) 
Materials for non-residential uses shall be stored inside or under cover and 
shall not be accessible to residents of the development. 
 
(4) 
Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized so as to reduce the 
amount of impervious surface. Where possible, parking and loading areas shall 
be connected to minimize curb cuts onto public rights-of-way. 
 
F. Buildings: Shared Outdoor Space. Multi-family housing and mixed-use development 
shall have common outdoor space that all residents can access. Such space may be 
located in any combination of ground floor, courtyard, rooftop, terrace, or Open Space. 
Shared outdoor space within the footprint of a building shall not count towards the 
project’s minimum Open Space requirement. 
 
G. Buildings: Corner Lots. A building on a corner lot shall indicate a primary entrance 
either along one of the street-facing façades or on the primary corner as an entrance 
serving both streets. 
 
(1) 
Such entries shall be connected by a paved surface to the public sidewalk, if 
applicable.  
 
(2) 
All façades visible from a public right-of-way shall be treated with similar care 
and attention in terms of entries, fenestration, and materials. 
 
(3) 
Fire exits serving more than one story shall not be located on either of the 
street-facing façades. 
 
H. Lots with Infill Buildings. If the adjacent buildings are set back at a distance that 
exceeds the minimum front yard requirements, infill buildings shall meet the 
requirements of Section 210-255. Dimensional Standards. Otherwise, infill buildings may 
match the setback line of either adjacent building, or an average of the setback of the 
two buildings to provide consistency along the street. 
 
I. 
Buildings: Principal Façade and Parking. Parking shall be subordinate in design and 
location to the principal building façade. 
 
(1) 
Surface parking. Surface parking shall be located to the rear or side of the 
principal building. Parking shall not be located in the setback between the 
building and any lot line adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
 
(2) 
Integrated garages. The principal pedestrian entry into the building shall be 
more prominent in design and placement than the vehicular entry into the 
garage. 
 

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
 
Select Board Chair Muriel Kramer ______ 
25 
(3) 
Parking structures. Building(s) dedicated to structured parking on the same 
lot as one or more multi-family buildings or mixed-use development shall be 
subordinate in design and placement to the multi-family or mixed-use 
building(s) on the lot. 
 
J. Planning Board Authority to Grant Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant and 
subject to conformance with Section 210-255. Dimensional Standards and the 
Compliance Guidelines, the Planning Board may waive the requirements of this Section 
210-257. General Development Standards, in the interests of design flexibility and 
overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of such variation with the 
overall purpose and objectives of the MCMOD. 
 
 
§ 210-258.  Affordability Requirements 
 
A. Any development within the MCMOD shall conform to the requirements of Article XI, 
Inclusionary Development, of these Zoning Bylaws, with the exception that the MCMOD 
shall require 10% of the total units be established as affordable housing units and where 
fractional units are the result, the number of affordable units shall be rounded down to 
the nearest whole number where the calculation of 10% of the units results in a half-unit 
(0.5) or less.  Where the calculation of 10% of the units results in more than a half-unit, 
the number of units shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.  For example, in 
MCMOD developments of 15 units, one affordable unit (as defined in Chapter 210) shall 
be created (1.5 units rounded down to one unit); in developments of 16 units, two 
affordable units shall be created (1.6 units rounded up to two units); and so on.   
 
B. In the event that the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) 
determines that the calculation detailed above does not comply with the provisions of 
Section 3A, the following standard shall apply.  
 
(1) Any development within the MCMOD shall conform to the requirements of Article 
XI, Inclusionary Development, of these Zoning Bylaws, with the exception that 
the MCMOD shall require 10% of the total units be established as affordable 
housing units and where fractional units are the result, the number of affordable 
units shall be rounded down to the next whole number.  For example, in MCMOD 
developments of 12 units, one affordable unit (as defined in Chapter 210) shall 
be created (1.2 units rounded down to one unit); in developments of 17 units, one 
affordable unit shall be created (1.7 units rounded down to one unit); and so on.   
 
§210-259. Site Plan Review.  
 
A. Applicability. Site Plan Review is required for any project proposed within the MCMOD. 
An application for Site Plan Review shall be reviewed by the Permitting Authority for 
consistency with the purpose and intent of Sections 210-254. Permitted Uses through 
210-258. Affordability. 
 
B. Submission Requirements. As part of any application for Site Plan Review for a project 
within the MCMOD, the Applicant must submit the following documents to the Planning 
Board: 
 
(1) 
Application and fee for Site Plan Review. 

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
 
Select Board Chair Muriel Kramer ______ 
26 
 
(2) 
Site plans that show the position of the building on the site, points of vehicular 
access to and from the site and vehicular circulation on the site, stormwater 
management, utilities, and landscape treatments, including any screening of 
adjacent properties, and other information commonly required by Municipality 
for Site Plan Review. 
 
(3) 
Elevations of the building(s) showing the architectural design of the building. 
 
(4) 
All site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, 
and/or a civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All 
landscape plans shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect registered 
in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All building elevations shall be 
prepared by a certified architect registered in the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts. All plans shall be signed and stamped, and drawings prepared 
at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') or larger, or at a scale as 
approved in advance by the Planning Board. 
 
(5) 
Narrative of compliance with the applicable design standards of this Article. 
 
C. Timeline. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of the filing of 
any application for a MCMOD Site Plan and shall file a decision within 90 days of the 
close of the hearing.  Notice of the time, place, and subject matter of the public hearing 
shall be given by the Planning Board, at the expense of the Applicant, to the Applicant 
and to all owners of land abutting the land being the subject of such application as 
appearing on the most recent tax list on file at the Assessor’s Office. In addition, the 
Planning Board shall also give notice of the time, place, and subject matter of the public 
hearing, at the expense of the Applicant, by advertisement in a newspaper of general 
circulation in the Town, once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication being 
not less than 14 days before the day of such hearing. The Planning Board may, when 
appropriate, seek the input of other municipal boards or officials. In general, site plan 
review should be completed no more than six months after the submission of the 
application, unless extended by written permission of the Applicant.  
 
D. Site Plan Approval. Site Plan approval for uses listed in Section 210-254. Permitted 
Uses shall be granted upon determination by the Planning Board that the following 
conditions have been satisfied. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions, 
at the expense of the applicant, to ensure that these conditions have been satisfied. 
 
(1) 
The Applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in 
Hopkinton’s requirements for a Building Permit and this Section 210-259, Site 
Plan Review; and  
 
(2) 
The project as described in the application meets the development standards 
set forth in Section 210-257. General Development Standards, unless any 
requirements have been waived by the Planning Board. 
 
E. Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Site Plan Review submission, that a 
project be developed in phases subject to the approval of the Planning Board, provided 
that the submission shows the full buildout of the project and all associated impacts as of 
