
===== PAGE 34 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 34 
 
G. Storage Shed at Fruit Street, these funds will provide a safe, dry storage area for 
recreational equipment that is used at the Pickleball/Tennis court.  
H. Chamberlain Connector Trail Phase 2, these funds will be used for the completion of 
the trail that was started with the first phase of the project.  
 
 
Motion #2 - Land Purchase Articles: (Community Preservation Committee)  We move 
that the Town vote, pursuant to Chapter 44B of the Massachusetts General Laws, to 
accept the report and recommendations of the Community Preservation Committee on 
the Fiscal Year 2025 Community Preservation budget, and to appropriate the following 
sums from Community Preservation Fund available funds for the following projects: 
 
I. 
$113,000 (ONE HUNDRED THIRTEEN THOUSAND DOLLARS) from funds reserved for 
Open Space Reserve for the land purchase, legal fees and surveying costs of the 
Larter Parcel (13.97 acres +/- Part of Assessors Map U6 lots 21, 20), with the 
following conditions: 1. That the grant expires on July 1, 2025 unless extended by 
the Community Preservation Committee. 2. Grant be spent under the direction of 
the Town Manager’s office and the Community Preservation Committee. 3. Grant 
includes all legal, administrative and survey cost for the purchase of the land. 4. 
That a Conservation Restriction be placed on the land within five years and that 
allows trails to be constructed. Land will be held by the Open Space Preservation 
Commission. 
 
J. $210,000 (TWO HUNDRED TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS) from funds reserved for Open 
Space Reserve for the land purchase, legal fees and surveying costs of the Colella 
Property Parcel (0 Hayden Rowe Assessors Map U24 4 0) with the following 
conditions: 1. That the grant expires on July 1, 2025 unless extended by the 
Community Preservation Committee. 2. Grant be spent under the direction of the 
Town Manager’s office and the Community Preservation Committee. 3. Grant 
includes all legal, administrative and survey cost for the purchase of the land. 4. 
That a Conservation Restriction be placed on the land within five years and that 
allows trails to be constructed. Land will be held by the Open Space Preservation 
Commission. 
Vote Needed: Two-thirds Majority. 
 
ARTICLE DESCRIPTION FROM THE SPONSOR:  
I. 
Larter Parcel, funds for this project will be for the land, legal cost and survey cost to 
purchase roughly 13.97 acres of land.  
J. Colella Property, funds for this project will be for the land, legal cost and survey cost 
to purchase roughly 20.86 acres of land.  
 
ZONING BYLAW AMENDMENTS 
 

===== PAGE 35 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 35 
 
ARTICLE: 39 
MBTA Communities Zoning Bylaw 
Sponsor: Planning Board 
 
To see if the Town will vote to amend Chapter 210, Zoning Bylaws to insert the following 
language after Article XXXV, Neighborhood Mixed Use District and to amend the Zoning Map to 
include the MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District: 
 
ARTICLE XXXVI 
MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District (MCMOD) Bylaw 
 
§ 210-251. Purpose and Intent.  
 
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multi-family 
housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General Laws 
Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as of right multi-family housing to accomplish the following 
purposes: 
 
A. Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and typologies to provide equal access to 
new housing throughout the community for people with a variety of needs and income levels. 
B. Locate housing within walking distance of public transit and other amenities to promote general 
public health, reduce the number of vehicular miles traveled, support economic development, 
and meet community-based environmental goals, including reducing greenhouse gasses and 
improving air quality. 
C. Support and encourage further public investment in public transit and pedestrian- and bike-
friendly infrastructure. 
D. Increase the municipal tax base through private investment in new residential developments. 
 
§ 210-252.  Establishment and Applicability. 
 
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 58.4 acres in size that is 
superimposed over the underlying zoning district(s) and is shown on the Zoning Map.  
 
A. Applicability of MCMOD.  
An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within a MCMOD in accordance with the 
provisions of this Article. 
 
B. Subdistricts. 
The MCMOD is composed of two (2) subdistricts, as defined by the Assessor Parcel numbers 
below and shown on the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) Map.  
 
(1) 
Upper Cedar Street Subdistrict  
 
Map R4 Block 8 Lot 0 
Map R4 Block 17 Lot 0  
Map R4 Block 12 Lot 0 
Map R4 Block 20 Lot 0 

===== PAGE 36 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 36 
 
 
(2) 
Downtown Subdistrict  
Map U16 Block 80 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 85 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 86 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 86 Lot A 
Map U16 Block 87 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 87 Lot A 
Map U16 Block 88 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 115 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 116 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 117 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 118 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 121 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 124 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 125 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 127 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 128 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 129 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 130 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 131 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 144 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 145 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 146 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 147 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 148 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 149 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 151 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 152 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 153 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 153 Lot 4 
Map U16 Block 220 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 221 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 222 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 223 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 250 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 254 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 255 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 256 Lot 0 
Map U16 Block 257 Lot 0 
 
C. Underlying Zoning.  
The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying zoning districts. The regulations 
for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing the respective 
underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except for uses allowed as of right or by 
special permit in the MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in Section 210-254 are governed by 
the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s). 
 
§ 210-253.  Definitions. 
 
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply to MCMOD developments.  Where the 
definitions contained herein differ from those in MGL 40A, Section 3A, the definitions contained in MGL 
40A, Section 3A shall be used: 
 
Affordable housing unit. A dwelling unit that qualifies as a Local Initiative Unit under the 
Commonwealth’s Local Initiative Program (760 CMR 45.00) and meets the requirements of a 
subsidized housing unit for purposes of listing in the Subsidized Housing Inventory under GL. c.40B 
§§ 20-23. 
 
Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this Article. 
 
Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site Plan Review, or 
Special Permit. 
 

===== PAGE 37 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 37 
 
As-of-right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning Bylaw in place at the time of 
application without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other 
discretionary zoning approval. 
 
Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts Under Section 3A, 
issued by EOHLC, as they exist on the date of adoption of this bylaw or may be revised or amended 
from time to time. 
 
Dwelling unit.  A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more 
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
 
EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (formerly known as 
Department of Housing and Community Development, or DHCD), or any successor agency. 
 
Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and non-residential 
uses, including commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses. 
 
Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or more 
buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building. 
 
Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay district, in which 
multi-family housing is allowed as of right. 
 
Open Space. Open space shall consist of landscaping, naturally vegetated areas, trails, and/or 
shared open areas with permeable hardscape. All open space must be an outdoor area on the 
ground, outside of the building footprints, which is open to the sky and which is designed and used 
for outdoor living and/or recreation and shall not include parking or vehicle circulation areas. 
Vegetated and/or landscaped setbacks may be included as Open Space.  
 
Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple stories; a 
vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or a vehicle parking 
area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has a parking surface at least 
eight feet below grade. Structured Parking does not include surface parking or carports, including 
solar carports. 
 
Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. A solar 
panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a built structure for 
the purposes of this definition. 
 
Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
 
Special permit granting authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall include the Select 
Board, Board of Appeals, or the Planning Board, as designated by the Zoning Bylaw for the issuance 
of special permits. 
 

===== PAGE 38 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 38 
 
Sub-district. An area within the MCMOD that is geographically smaller than the MCMOD district and 
differentiated from the rest of the district by use, dimensional standards, or development standards. 
 
§ 210-254.  Permitted Uses. 
 
A. Uses Permitted As-of-Right. The following uses are permitted as-of-right within the MCMOD. 
 
(1) 
Multi-family housing. 
 
B. Uses Permitted by Special Permit. The following uses require a Special Permit from the Planning 
Board.  
 
(1) 
Mixed-use development. Uses that may be allowed in a mixed-use development are 
as follows: 
a. Ground Floor: Community space; Educational uses; Personal services; Retail;  
Experiential retail, including retail associated with dance or exercise studios, 
music studios, photography studios, or other combination of education, 
services, and retail; Restaurant, café, and other eating establishments without a 
drive-through; Office, professional office, medical and dental offices, and co-
working space Artists’ studios, maker space, and small-scale food production 
(no more than 5,000 sf), and retail associated with each use.  
 
b. Any Floor: Residential. 
 
C. Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as-of-right to any of the by-right or 
permitted uses in Section 210-254.A or 210-254.B.  
 
(1) 
Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an above 
ground or underground parking garage or other building on the same lot as the 
principal use.  
 
(2) 
Any use meeting the definition of “Accessory Use” under § 210-4 of this Chapter. 
 
§ 210-255.  Dimensional Standards. 
 
A. Dimensional Standards.  
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning Bylaw, the dimensional requirements 
applicable in the MCMOD are as follows: 
 
(1) 
Upper Cedar Street Subdistrict 
 
a. Minimum Lot Size:  15,000 square feet.  
 
b. Maximum Height: 40 feet. 
 
c. Minimum Open Space:  30%. 

===== PAGE 43 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 43 
 
(5) 
The building(s) adjacent to the public street shall have a pedestrian entry facing the 
public street. 
 
E. Buildings: Mixed-use development. 
 
(1) 
In a mixed-use building, access to and egress from the residential component shall be 
clearly differentiated from access to other uses. Such differentiation may occur by 
using separate entrances or egresses from the building or within a lobby space shared 
among different uses. 
 
(2) 
Paved pedestrian access from the residential component shall be provided to 
residential parking and amenities and to the public sidewalk, as applicable. 
 
(3) 
Materials for non-residential uses shall be stored inside or under cover and shall not 
be accessible to residents of the development. 
 
(4) 
Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized so as to reduce the amount of 
impervious surface. Where possible, parking and loading areas shall be connected to 
minimize curb cuts onto public rights-of-way. 
 
F. Buildings: Shared Outdoor Space. Multi-family housing and mixed-use development shall have 
common outdoor space that all residents can access. Such space may be located in any 
combination of ground floor, courtyard, rooftop, terrace, or Open Space. Shared outdoor space 
within the footprint of a building shall not count towards the project’s minimum Open Space 
requirement. 
 
G. Buildings: Corner Lots. A building on a corner lot shall indicate a primary entrance either along 
one of the street-facing façades or on the primary corner as an entrance serving both streets. 
 
(1) 
Such entries shall be connected by a paved surface to the public sidewalk, if 
applicable.  
 
(2) 
All façades visible from a public right-of-way shall be treated with similar care and 
attention in terms of entries, fenestration, and materials. 
 
(3) 
Fire exits serving more than one story shall not be located on either of the street-
facing façades. 
 
H. Lots with Infill Buildings. If the adjacent buildings are set back at a distance that exceeds the 
minimum front yard requirements, infill buildings shall meet the requirements of Section 210-
255. Dimensional Standards. Otherwise, infill buildings may match the setback line of either 
adjacent building, or an average of the setback of the two buildings to provide consistency along 
the street. 
 
I. 
Buildings: Principal Façade and Parking. Parking shall be subordinate in design and location to 
the principal building façade. 

===== PAGE 44 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 44 
 
 
(1) 
Surface parking. Surface parking shall be located to the rear or side of the principal 
building. Parking shall not be located in the setback between the building and any lot 
line adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
 
(2) 
Integrated garages. The principal pedestrian entry into the building shall be more 
prominent in design and placement than the vehicular entry into the garage. 
 
(3) 
Parking structures. Building(s) dedicated to structured parking on the same lot as one 
or more multi-family buildings or mixed-use development shall be subordinate in 
design and placement to the multi-family or mixed-use building(s) on the lot. 
 
J. Planning Board Authority to Grant Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant and subject to 
conformance with Section 210-255. Dimensional Standards and the Compliance Guidelines, the 
Planning Board may waive the requirements of this Section 210-257. General Development 
Standards, in the interests of design flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a finding of 
consistency of such variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the MCMOD. 
 
§ 210-258.  Affordability Requirements 
 
A. Any development within the MCMOD shall conform to the requirements of Article XI, 
Inclusionary Development, of these Zoning Bylaws, with the exception that the MCMOD shall 
require 10% of the total units be established as affordable housing units and where fractional 
units are the result, the number of affordable units shall be rounded down to the nearest whole 
number where the calculation of 10% of the units results in a half-unit (0.5) or less.  Where the 
calculation of 10% of the units results in more than a half-unit, the number of units shall be 
rounded up to the nearest whole number.  For example, in MCMOD developments of 15 units, 
one affordable unit (as defined in Chapter 210) shall be created (1.5 units rounded down to one 
unit); in developments of 16 units, two affordable units shall be created (1.6 units rounded up to 
two units); and so on.   
 
B. In the event that the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) determines 
that the calculation detailed above does not comply with the provisions of Section 3A, the 
following standard shall apply.  
 
(1) Any development within the MCMOD shall conform to the requirements of Article XI, 
Inclusionary Development, of these Zoning Bylaws, with the exception that the MCMOD 
shall require 10% of the total units be established as affordable housing units and where 
fractional units are the result, the number of affordable units shall be rounded down to 
the next whole number.  For example, in MCMOD developments of 12 units, one 
affordable unit (as defined in Chapter 210) shall be created (1.2 units rounded down to 
one unit); in developments of 17 units, one affordable unit shall be created (1.7 units 
rounded down to one unit); and so on.   
 
§210-259. Site Plan Review.  
 

===== PAGE 45 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 45 
 
A. Applicability. Site Plan Review is required for any project proposed within the MCMOD. An 
application for Site Plan Review shall be reviewed by the Permitting Authority for consistency 
with the purpose and intent of Sections 210-254. Permitted Uses through 210-258. Affordability. 
 
B. Submission Requirements. As part of any application for Site Plan Review for a project within 
the MCMOD, the Applicant must submit the following documents to the Planning Board: 
 
(1) 
Application and fee for Site Plan Review. 
 
(2) 
Site plans that show the position of the building on the site, points of vehicular access 
to and from the site and vehicular circulation on the site, stormwater management, 
utilities, and landscape treatments, including any screening of adjacent properties, 
and other information commonly required by Municipality for Site Plan Review. 
 
(3) 
Elevations of the building(s) showing the architectural design of the building. 
 
(4) 
All site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, and/or a 
civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All landscape plans 
shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth 
of Massachusetts. All building elevations shall be prepared by a certified architect 
registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All plans shall be signed and 
stamped, and drawings prepared at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') or 
larger, or at a scale as approved in advance by the Planning Board. 
 
(5) 
Narrative of compliance with the applicable design standards of this Article. 
 
C. Timeline. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of the filing of any 
application for a MCMOD Site Plan and shall file a decision within 90 days of the close of the 
hearing.  Notice of the time, place, and subject matter of the public hearing shall be given by the 
Planning Board, at the expense of the Applicant, to the Applicant and to all owners of land 
abutting the land being the subject of such application as appearing on the most recent tax list 
on file at the Assessor’s Office. In addition, the Planning Board shall also give notice of the time, 
place, and subject matter of the public hearing, at the expense of the Applicant, by 
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, once in each of two successive 
weeks, the first publication being not less than 14 days before the day of such hearing. The 
Planning Board may, when appropriate, seek the input of other municipal boards or officials. In 
general, site plan review should be completed no more than six months after the submission of 
the application, unless extended by written permission of the Applicant.  
 
D. Site Plan Approval. Site Plan approval for uses listed in Section 210-254. Permitted Uses shall be 
granted upon determination by the Planning Board that the following conditions have been 
satisfied. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions, at the expense of the 
applicant, to ensure that these conditions have been satisfied. 
 

===== PAGE 46 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 46 
 
(1) 
The Applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in 
Hopkinton’s requirements for a Building Permit and this Section 210-259, Site Plan 
Review; and  
 
(2) 
The project as described in the application meets the development standards set forth 
in Section 210-257. General Development Standards, unless any requirements have 
been waived by the Planning Board. 
 
E. Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Site Plan Review submission, that a project be 
developed in phases subject to the approval of the Planning Board, provided that the 
submission shows the full buildout of the project and all associated impacts as of the completion 
of the final phase. However, no project may be phased solely to avoid the provisions of Section 
210-258. Affordability Requirements. 
 
Section 210-260. Severability. 
If any provision of this Article is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder 
of Article shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. The invalidity of any provision of this Article 
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Hopkinton Zoning Bylaw. 
 
Pass any vote or take any act relative thereto. 
 
Required Recommendation: Planning Board recommends Approval. 
 
Motion: (Planning Board) We move that the Town vote to amend the Zoning Bylaws of 
the Town of Hopkinton  and the Zoning Map, as set forth in Article 39 of the 2024 Annual 
Town Meeting Warrant. 
 
Vote Needed: Simple Majority. 
 
ARTICLE DESCRIPTION FROM THE SPONSOR: This article establishes an overlay zoning 
district that complies with the Commonwealth's MBTA Communities multi-family by-
right housing law, otherwise known as MGL c. 40A, Section 3A.  This article would add a 
new section to the Hopkinton Zoning Bylaws to establish this district as well as amend 
the Zoning Map to show the two sub-district locations.  
 
ARTICLE: 40 
Zoning Map Change, 1 Colonial Avenue, 81 Hayden 
Rowe, 83 Hayden Rowe 
Sponsor: Citizens Petition 
 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning Map of the Town of Hopkinton by changing the 
zoning district of land at 1 Colonial Avenue shown on Assessor Map U22, Block 38, Lot 0, and 
land at 81 Hayden Rowe shown on Assessor Map U19, Block 175, Lot 0, and land at 83 Hayden 
Rowe shown on the Assessor Map U19, Block 175, Lot 2 from the Residential A, (RA) District to 
Business (B) District. 
 
Pass any vote or take any act relative thereto. 
 

===== PAGE 47 =====
 
Motions Document 
Page 47 
 
Required Recommendation: Planning Board recommends No Action. 
 
Motion: (Petitioner) We move that the Town vote to amend the Zoning Map of the 
Town of Hopkinton as set forth in Article 40 of the 2024 Annual Town Meeting Warrant. 
  
Vote Needed: Two-Thirds Majority. 
 
GENERAL BYLAW AMENDMENTS 
 
ARTICLE: 41 
Amend Noncriminal Disposition Bylaw 
Sponsor: Conservation Commission 
 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the General Bylaws, Chapter 1, Article II, Section 1-4 
Penalties enumerated, by inserting a new row at the end of the section to read as follows: 
 
Citation to Law, Bylaw, Rule or 
Regulation, if Applicable 
Subject of Bylaw and Enforcing 
Person 
Penalty 
Wetlands Protection (Ch. 206) 
Wetlands Protection 
 
Conservation Administrator, 
Environmental and Inspectional 
Services Coordinator, 
Conservation Commission 
Members or Agents as 
designated by the Conservation 
Commission or Conservation 
Administrator 
$300 per violation, 
each day being a 
separate offense 
 
Pass any vote or take any act relative thereto. 
 
Motion: (Conservation Commission) We move that the Town vote to amend the 
General Bylaws of the Town of Hopkinton, as set forth in Article 41 of the 2024 Annual 
Town Meeting Warrant. 
 
Vote Needed: Simple Majority. 
 
ARTICLE: 42 
General Bylaw Amendment – Membership 
Requirements for Certain Committees 
Sponsor: Select Board 
 
To see if the Town will amend Chapter 5, Boards, Committees and Commissions, of the General 
Bylaws as follows: 
 
