
===== PAGE 22 =====
20 
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage. 
or take any action relative thereto. (Inserted at the request of the Select Board) 
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 26: FAVORABLE ACTION: This Article seeks to allow the 
Select Board to establish a schedule of fines for parking violations up to $100.00. The Town 
currently lacks authority to establish this higher fee limit. The lower fee structure currently in 
place has proven an insufficient deterrent for illegal parking during peak season. In order to 
maintain adequate off-street parking for Town residents the Advisory Board agrees with 
providing the Select Board with this authority. (Unanimous) 
ARTICLE 27:   To see if the Town will amend Section 56-11 of the Town’s General Bylaws as 
set forth below; or take any other action relative thereto:  
(Strikeout to be removed / Underlined to be added) 
§ 56-11Speaking on a question.
[Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 16] 
A.  
No person shall speak more than twice upon any question, except for the correction of an error 
or to make an explanation, without first obtaining approval of the Moderator, nor until others who 
have not spoken on the question shall speak if they desire. 
B.  
No person shall speak for more than seven five minutes the first time, excluding the presenter 
of the article, whose time to speak shall be a reasonable time as determined by the Moderator. 
No person shall speak more than three minutes for the second time on any subject, if there are 
others who desire to speak but who have not been heard on the same subject, without first 
obtaining approval of the moderator. The time for any person to speak may be extended upon 
request, by approval of the moderator.  
C.  
Every person desiring to speak shall approach the provided microphone(s) first obtain 
recognition from the Chair and stand while speaking, unless the Moderator otherwise directs. A 
microphone shall be provided for those unable to approach the microphone. 
Or take any action relative thereto. (Inserted at the request of the Town Moderator) 
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 27: FAVORABLE ACTION: This Article seeks to amend 
General Bylaws to expedite Town meeting discussion by establishing a reasonable time limit 
while ensuring that order in being recognized to speak. The spirit of this change is to allow for 
more diverse perspectives to be shared. This change still provides more time for each speaker 
than surrounding Towns and allows the Moderator discretion to allow more time to speak as 
necessary. (Unanimous) 
ARTICLE 28:  To see if the Town will amend the Zoning Bylaw §410-3.2.A(8) Accessory 
Dwelling Units; §410-4.1 Site plan review; §410-4.10 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS; and 
amend §410-5.1 Table 50 as follows: 
(Strikeout to be removed / Underlined to be added) 

===== PAGE 23 =====
21 
§410-3.2 Single-Family Residence Districts A, B and C
A.
Permitted uses for Single-Family Residence Districts A, B and C
(8)
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU), subject to the requirements of §410-
4.10 of this Zoning Bylaw.
§410-4.1 Site plan review
A.
Site Plan Review requirements shall not be construed to prevent compliance with
G.L c. 40A §3A or §3.
B.
Applicability: The site plan review and approval provisions of this section shall
apply to the following types of structures and uses:
(5)
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU), subject to the requirements of §410-
4.10 of this Zoning Bylaw. 
§410-4.10 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
A. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Bylaw is to provide:
(1) Accessory dwelling units without significantly adding to the number of buildings in the
Town or substantially altering the appearance of the residential property and for the
purpose of enabling owners of single-family dwellings to share space and the burdens of
homeownership with others while also protecting the stability, property values and
residential character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Owner occupants of single-family homes with a means of obtaining rental income,
companionship, and/or security, thereby enabling them to remain more comfortably
in homes and neighborhoods they might otherwise be forced to leave;
(3) A limited number of Accessory Dwelling Units via special permit which allows for
orderly development and ultimately limited impact on the community;
(2) Provide housing units for persons with diverse housing needs including, without
limitations, persons with mental and physical disabilities.
(3) To enable the Town to monitor Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) construction and use for
code compliance.
B. DEFINITIONS (unless superseded by 760 CMR 71.00):
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU)
A self-contained housing unit incorporated within a single-family dwelling and clearly
subordinate in size to the principal dwelling in a manner that maintains the character and
structural appearance of a single-family dwelling consistent with the provisions of §410-
4.10 and G.L. Chapter 40A §1A Definition of “Accessory Dwelling Unit.”
A self-contained housing unit, inclusive of sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities on the
same lot as a principal dwelling, subject to otherwise applicable dimensional and parking
requirements, that: (i) maintains a separate entrance, either directly from the outside or
through an entry hall or corridor shared with the principal dwelling sufficient to meet the

===== PAGE 24 =====
22 
requirements of the Building Code for safe egress; (ii) is not larger in Gross Floor Area than 
1/2 the gross floor area of the principal dwelling or 900 square feet, whichever is smaller; (iii) 
is subject to such additional restrictions as may be imposed by a municipality including, but 
not limited to, additional size restrictions, and restrictions or prohibitions on Short-term 
Rental as defined in M.G.L. c. 64G, § 1; provided, however, that no Municipality shall 
unreasonably restrict the creation or rental of an ADU that is not a Short-term Rental.  
GROSS FLOOR AREA  
As applied to ADUs, Gross Floor Area shall mean the sum of the areas of all stories of the 
building of compliant ceiling height pursuant to the Building Code, including basements, 
lofts, and intermediate floored tiers, measured from the interior faces of exterior walls or 
from the centerline of walls separating buildings or dwelling units but excluding crawl 
spaces, garage parking areas, attics, enclosed porches and similar spaces. Where there 
are multiple Principal Dwellings on the Lot, the GFA of the largest Principal Dwelling shall 
be used for determining the maximum size of a Protected Use ADU. 
PRINCIPAL DWELLING 
For the purposes of this §410-4.10 is a single-family dwelling exclusive of the area that 
constitutes the Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). A structure, regardless of whether it, or 
the Lot it is situated on, conforms to Zoning, including use requirements and 
dimensional requirements, such as setbacks, bulk, and height, that contains at least one 
Dwelling Unit and is, or will be, located on the same Lot as a ADU. 
A single-family dwelling with an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) shall not be deemed to be a 
two-family dwelling. 
C. PROCEDURES
(1) Accessory Dwelling Units created under this by-law shall require a special permit site
plan review from by the Board of Appeals under §410-4.1. Specifically, §410-4.1.C(1)
process; §410-4.1.C(2)(a)[1]-[4] submission materials; §410-4.1.C(4) public hearing;
§410-4.1.C(5)(a) board action.
(It shall be understood that for a site plan review for ADU under §410-4.1 the “Board of 
Appeals” shall substitute for “Planning Board” where identified in the code). 
Review shall be restricted to ADU location, location and design of parking areas and 
driveways, exterior lighting, screening, and any applicable local design guidelines or 
aesthetic standards.  
Best efforts shall be made by the Board of Appeals to hold the public hearing, complete 
its review and provide a decision within 45 days of receiving an application. 
(2) The owner shall submit an application for a building permit for an ADU, along with
building plans, and survey and site plans of the existing and proposed conditions, to the
Building Commissioner for review.
(3) If the Building Commissioner determines the proposed ADU is in compliance with this
zoning bylaw §410-4.10, and all code requirements for residential use the application

===== PAGE 34 =====
32 
marijuana for medical purposes. Or take any action relative thereto. (Inserted at the request of 
the Select Board) 
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 31: FAVORABLE ACTION: This Article is a housekeeping 
Article resolving an inadvertent inconsistency between a prior 2018 General Bylaw prohibiting 
all types of licensed marijuana-related business and the subsequent Town-approved Bylaws 
that does, in fact, allow certain types of marijuana-related businesses. This Article simply settles 
that inconsistency by deleting the prior Bylaw’s prohibition and allowing the subsequent Town-
approved Bylaws to stand. It does not permit any additional marijuana businesses or categories. 
For that reason, the Advisor Board recommends Favorable Action on this Article. (Unanimous) 
ARTICLE 32: Citizens of Hull Massachusetts would like to rezone as Public Open Space 
several Town-owned and private conservation trust parcels that are currently located in Single 
Family Zoning Districts but which are within or adjacent to state­protected Areas of Critical 
Environmental Concern and are currently used as public open space waterfront access, 
specifically the following parcels: 
Straits Pond and Island (within a protected ACEC Zone) parcel numbers 50-028, 55-009 and 
55-010; Weir River Estuary parcel numbers 46-014, 44-141, 44-100, 44-147, 44-154, 44-155,
44-158 and 47-197;  Rockaway Annex parcel numbers 45-026, 45-038, 45-017, 45-053, 45-065
and 43-023 (a lagoon); Weir River Woods parcel numbers 46-00l, 46-002, 47-002, and 47-011;
Newport Road water access parcel numbers 24-064 and 26-126, submitted by Lisa French, and
others.
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 32: UNFAVORABLE ACTION: Majority Opinion: This 
Article seeks to rezone individual non-contiguous lots as Public Open Space. Public Open 
Space Zoning in the Town Bylaws have the following Permitted Uses: 
Town Owned Property 
Public Beaches 
Parks 
“M.D.C.” beaches and parks with public parking and open space, play areas, pedestrian 
walks, landscaping and structures incidental hereto. 
Minority Opinion: One member of the Advisory Board was hesitant to vote "Unfavorable 
Action" because the Citizen who brought forth this Article stated that she may amend the motion 
to not include private parcels. This Advisory Board member would have felt more comfortable to 
vote at Town Meeting after the Motion  has been presented.      
ARTICLE 33: Citizens of Hull Massachusetts would like to amend Section 410-4.9 Inclusionary 
Housing Unit Zoning Bylaw [approved at 2023 Town Meeting] to increase the supply of dwelling 
units available at a cost of no more than 30% of gross household income for households with 
combined income at or below 80% of Boston area median household income. New multi-family 
developments, redevelopments or conversions with four or more units will be required to set 
aside 100% of the units for eligible low-income households. Under this provision, every new 
unit, rented or owned, will count towards the statutory minimum affordable housing inventory 
requirement for the Town of Hull under 760 CMR 56.03(a).  The affordable units, unless 
otherwise prohibited by federal or state agency under a financing or other subsidy program, 
shall be offered first to current residents of the Town of Hull who qualify under the income 
guidelines and who have resided in the Town of Hull for a minimum of five years. The Affordable 
Housing Committee shall establish a ranking system for categories of income-eligible buyers 
and renters. Eligible residents within each category will be selected via lottery and offered 

===== PAGE 35 =====
33 
affordable units as appropriate and according to availability, submitted by Lisa French and 
others.  
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 33: UNFAVORABLE ACTION: This Citizens Petition 
seeks to significantly amend the Town’s Inclusionary Housing Zoning Bylaw that was approved 
by the 2023 Town Meeting. The current Zoning Bylaw was approved only after significant efforts 
by the Planning Board, the Zoning Bylaw Committee, the Director of Community Development & 
Planning, and many others after many public hearings. The final approved Zoning Bylaw was 
tailored for certain large projects to balance the interests of the development community to allow 
both reasonable development opportunities and enhance affordable housing in the Town, all 
with a high degree of local control. It includes metrics that have been successful in other 
communities in stimulating a mix of market-based and affordable housing; including a ten 
percent (10%) threshold for affordable housing in certain sized developments and customary 
income metrics that this petition seeks to replace. Zoning regulations are, by their nature, 
technical and intricate and, on top of that, most affordable housing developments include a 
complicated mix of financing, construction requirements and tax incentive programs to make 
projects viable. This petition, although no-doubt well-intentioned, would likely have immediate 
and inadvertent adverse impacts undermining the Town’s efforts and control on measured 
development, including affordable housing. For instance, in making any development under this 
Bylaw consist of one hundred percent (100%) affordable housing, rather than ten percent (10%) 
under the current Bylaw, this petition would effectively remove customary market-based 
incentives present in the existing Bylaw. This proposed change would make it more likely that 
developers would look to develop projects using other methods, including Chapter 40B, 
resulting in the loss of significant Town control for such projects, or to simply bypass the Town 
altogether for other communities. The Community Development & Planning Director also 
expressed concern that passage of this Article would immediately make the Town noncompliant 
under the recently enacted MBTA Communities Act (potentially jeopardizing State funding 
opportunities).  For these and other reasons, the Advisory Board agrees with the Planning 
Board. (Unanimous) 
ARTICLE 34: This Citizen's Petition article proposes to remove the existing rental requirement 
for residential housing in the Business District. 
To see if the Town will amend Zoning By-laws Article III Section 410-3.5.A. Permitted uses for 
Business District subsection (1)(g) by removing the text shown as strikethrough or take any 
other action relative thereto as follows: "Mixed Multi-Family Residential and Business, provided, 
however, that no less than 30% of the gross floor area be for business uses, such as office, 
bank, and restaurant, or any wholesale, retail or service business except places of amusement, 
not involving manufacture on the premises except of products the major portion of which are 
sold on the premises by the producer to the consumer, with the remainder to be for rental 
residential use.", submitted by Joseph E. McLaughlin and others. 
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 34: REFER TO STUDY: This Citizen’s Petition seeks to 
remove the “Rental” requirement from permissible residential uses in a Business District. The 
restriction of residential uses to rentals in a district is not common.  Zoning typically permits how 
a property is used and dimensional requirements and restrictions there are for a parcel in the 
zone. Residential use is permitted for Mixed/Multi Family and Multifamily dwellings in the 
Business District under certain circumstances and requirements. The Advisory Board generally 
agrees that the rental requirement should be reviewed with an eye toward rescission, we concur 
with the Planning Board that this requires further study to ensure there are no unintended 
consequences.  While there is some concern that this may impact the affordability of units, 
unless housing units have specified deed restrictions for Low and Moderate Income Housing, 

===== PAGE 36 =====
34 
Senior Housing, or others, they remain subject to market conditions and don’t count for Hull’s 
affordable housing goals. (Unanimous) 
ARTICLE 35: To Amend Town of Hull By Laws Chapter 410-3.5A. Permitted Uses For Business 
District (1) (g) Remove the word "rental" from the first sentence, submitted by Dana Sceviour 
and others. 
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 35: REFER TO STUDY: This Citizen’s Petition seeks to 
remove the “Rental” requirement from permissible residential uses in a Business District. The 
restriction of residential uses to rentals in a district is not common.  Zoning typically permits how 
a property is used and dimensional requirements and restrictions there are for a parcel in the 
zone. Residential use is permitted for Mixed/Multi Family and Multifamily dwellings in the 
Business District under certain circumstances and requirements. The Advisory Board generally 
agrees that the rental requirement should be reviewed with an eye toward rescission, we concur 
with the Planning Board that this requires further study to ensure there are no unintended 
consequences.  While there is some concern that this may impact the affordability of units, 
unless housing units have specified deed restrictions for Low and Moderate Income Housing, 
Senior Housing, or others, they remain subject to market conditions and don’t count for Hull’s 
affordable housing goals. (Unanimous) 
ARTICLE 36: To see if the Town of Hull will repeal Zoning Bylaw Section 410-4.3 Flexible Plan 
Development [Article IV Section 43- Adopted 5/2/2011 by Town Meeting as Article 31, under Ch 
173 of the 1989 Code, Amended 5/9/2018 at Town Meeting as Article 23], submitted by Cindy 
Borges and others. 
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 36: NO ACTION: This Citizen’s Petition Article seeks to 
remove the Flexible Plan Development from our Zoning Bylaws.  While there may be sections of 
this Bylaw that some may wish to see changed, there are options set forth in the Bylaw that 
protect the Citizens of Hull from certain impacts of development.  By rescinding this Bylaw 
without a thorough review of other options to amend the Bylaw the citizens of Hull could lose 
access to the waterfront, boat ramps, or other passive marine recreational facilities. The 
proponent expressed concerns with two (2) specific items that could more appropriately be 
addressed by amendment. While the Planning Board has indicated support to approve this 
article and address the issue later, the Advisory Board is of the opinion that Town Meeting 
should take no action on this until the Planning Board has developed amendments or a new 
zoning overlay to take its place.(Unanimous) 
ARTICLE 37: To vote and to take any actions therein, that Town Meeting approves the 
removal of the Town Manager as Hull Municipal Light Plant Manager and to restore to the Hull 
Municipal Light Board of Commissioners the statutory responsibility found in M. G. L. A. c. 164, 
et seq., including but not limited to the ability to make policy, hire and fire Hull Municipal Light 
Plant Manager, Hull Municipal Light Plant employees (pursuant to Union agreements and, if 
any, civil service requirements) and to perform as a Board of Commissioners those actions and 
responsibilities it had prior to 1993, and to take any other action thereof, submitted by Jacob 
Vailancourt and others.  
RECOMMENDATION ON ARTICLE 37: UNFAVORABLE ACTION: One of the current areas of 
responsibility for the Town Manager is to be the Hull Municipal Light Plant Manager and the 
Town Manager’s compensation reflects this responsibility. The current model allows oversight, 
coordination, and alignment with the Town. This is a similar model with other departments in 
the Town such as the Sewer Department, Public Safety Departments, among others. 
