
===== PAGE 15 =====
 
                                                                                 Town Meeting 2025 - Page | 15 
 
Chapter 44 of the General Laws and/or Chapter 29C of the General Laws; that the Treasurer with 
the approval of the Select board is authorized to borrow all or a portion of such amount from the 
Massachusetts Clean Water Trust established pursuant to Chapter 29C and in connection 
therewith to enter into a financing agreement and/or security agreement with the Trust and 
otherwise to contract with the Trust and the Department of Environmental Protection with 
respect to such loan and for any federal or state aid available for the project or for the financing 
thereof; and that the Select Board is authorized to enter into a project regulatory agreement with 
the Department of Environmental Protection, to expend all funds available for the project and to 
take any other action necessary or convenient to carry out the project. 
 
Inserted at the request of the Town Manager.  The Advisory Board recommended Favorable 
Action. 
 
The motion was made and seconded. 
 
John Struzziery, Director of Wastewater Operations spoke briefly on the article. 
 
Vote on Article 18:  The motion passed by a vote of 105 to 30. 
 
ARTICLE 29 
 
A motion was made to adjourn the meeting and take up Article 29 as the first order of business 
when Town Meeting resumes on May 7, 2025.  The motion was seconded and passed by a voice 
vote. 
 
Town Meeting, Wednesday, May 7, 2025 
 
Town Meeting resumed at 7:00 p.m. on May 7, 2025. 
 
Before discussion began James Canavan offered a few words asking that people speak 
respectfully during debate on the articles.   
 
ARTICLE 29 
 
Motion:  That the Town vote to amend the Zoning Bylaw, Sec. 410-7.1 Signs, billboards and 
other projections in the words of Article 29 as written in the warrant with numbering as indicated 
or to be done by the Town Clerk as necessary. 
 
Inserted as the request of the Select Board.  The Advisory Board recommended Favorable 
Action. 
 
The motion was made and seconded. 
 
Marie Rockett from the Design Review Board and Michael Parks from the Hull Beautification 
Committee gave a presentation on the Article.  Jeanne Paquin, Chair of the Planning Board, 
spoke in favor. 

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
                                                                                 Town Meeting 2025 - Page | 16 
 
Vote on Article 29:  The motion passed by a vote of 130 to 14. 
 
ARTICLE 33 
 
Motion:  That citizens of Hull, Massachusetts amend Section 410-4.9 Inclusionary Housing Unit 
Zoning Bylaw (approved at 2023 Town Meeting) to increase the supply of dwelling units 
available at a cost of no more than 30% of gross household income for low-income households 
with combined income at or below 80% of Boston area median income. 
 
New private multi-family developments, redevelopments or conversions with four or more units 
will be required to set aside 100% of the units for eligible low-income households.  Under this 
provision, every new unit, for rent or ownership, will count towards the statutory minimum 
affordable housing inventory requirement for the Town of Hull under 760 CMR 56.03(a).   
 
Under this bylaw, the Hull Affordable Housing Committee shall create and the Select Board shall 
approve impartial resident selection preference policy and procedures which shall, to the 
maximum extent possible subject to state and federal fair housing regulations and approvals, 
make new affordable dwelling units produced under this bylaw available as appropriate to 
income-eligible applicants in the following order of priority: local residents, seniors, persons 
with disabilities, veterans and employees of local businesses.  The Select Board shall designate 
appropriate administrative staff and boards to oversee implementation and compliance with 
approved policy and procedures.  Developers shall be responsible for marketing affordable units, 
determining resident eligibility and administering lottery processes in accordance with Hull 
housing policy and procedures and federal and state fair housing regulations and guidelines.   
 
Citizens of Hull Massachusetts would like to amend Zoning bylaw Article IV, Section 410-4.9 
Inclusionary Housing Unit Requirement (Added 5/1/2023 ATM by Article 17) as follows: 
 
A. Purpose: The provisions of the bylaw is designed to: 
(1) Increase the supply of affordable rental and ownership housing in the Town of Hull --
across all zoning districts within zoning districts that permit multi-family housing 
developments, exclusive of MBTA Multi-Family Overlay Districts. 
(2) Encourage a greater diversity and distribution of housing to meet the needs of seniors, 
families and individuals at all income levels and Insure access and fair distribution of 
affordable housing units, as available and appropriate, to meet the needs of low-
income residents, prioritizing seniors, persons with disabilities, veterans, and 
employees of local businesses.   
(3) Prevent the displacement of low-income Hull residents, and  
(4) Meet the 10% minimum Subsidized Housing Inventory requirement under Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (CMR) 760 56.03. 
 
B. Definitions: 
 
AREA MEDIAN INCOME (AMI) 
The median income, adjusted for household size, within for the Boston Metropolitan 
Statistical Area (MSA) published by or calculated from regulations promulgated by the 

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
                                                                                 Town Meeting 2025 - Page | 17 
 
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or any successor federal 
or state program. 
 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT (AHU) 
A dwelling unit available at a cost of no more than 30% of gross household income of 
those households at or below 80% of the Boston Area Median Income MSA median 
income as reported by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
 
INCOME, LOW OR MODERATE LEVEL OF AFFORDABILITY 
Extremely Low Income - households making 30j% or less than the median income of 
Boston MSA 
Very Low Income - households making 50% or less than the median income of Boston 
MSA 
Low Income – households making 50% 80% or less than of the area median income of 
the Boston MSA 
Moderate Income – households making 80% 120% or less than of the median income of 
the Boston MSA.   
 
PROJECT 
Any residential development including housing created both by new construction or 
remodeling and conversion of an obsolete or unused building or other structure from its 
original or more recent use to an alternate use, including those set forth in the section 
entitled “Applicability.”  Where the project is a senior residential development as set 
forth below, the term “dwelling unit” shall be construed to mean “units within senior 
residential developments.” 
 
C. Applicability:  In all zoning districts, the provisions of this Bylaw shall apply to the 
following uses: 
(1) Any project that results in a new increase of ten four (4) or more dwelling units, 
whether by new construction or by the alteration, expansion, reconstruction or change 
of existing residential or non-residential space; and 
(2) Any subdivision of lane for development of ten four(4) or more dwelling units; and 
(3) Any senior residential development that includes ten four (4) or more senior 
residential units and accompanying services.   
 
D. Provision of Affordable Units: 
(1) The development of any project as defined in this paragraph. 
(2) As a condition for granting any permit hereunder, the Applicant (Developer) shall 
contribute to the stock Hull’s Subsidized Housing Inventory of affordable dwelling 
units in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a) Percentage of affordable units set aside: For projects resulting in a new increase of 
ten four(4) or more dwelling units, the applicant Developer shall be required to set 
aside a minimum of 10% one hundred percent (100%) of the net increase as 
affordable units, and a minimum of 10% (one hundred percent (100%) of the total 
number of bedrooms provided as affordable housing.  
