
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 18, 2023  3:26 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Hull
1.2. Community Category
Adjacent community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
586
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
Yes
Description Area
Although there is a MBTA rapid transit station within its municipal
boundaries, this municipality's community category is Adjacent. This is
because the methodology used to determine community category
considers not only stations that are located within municipal boundaries,
but also whether the transit station area associated with those stations
amounts to at least 100 acres of "developable station area" within the
boundaries. Section 1 of the Guidelines provides definitions of "transit
station area", "developable station area", and "developable land" to explain
how this determination was made.&nbsp;
1.4a. Please list MBTA rapid transit
stations that are located within this
municipality's boundaries
Pemberton Ferry Terminal
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
No

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Christopher  Diiorio
1.7a. Title
Community Development and Planning Director
1.7b. Email Address
cdiiorio@town.hull.ma.us
1.7c. Phone Number
(781) 925-3595
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Philip Lemnios
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
253 Atlantic Avenue
Hull , MA 02045
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
plemnios@town.hull.ma.us
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Hull Planning Board: seven elected members from the community
Zoning By-law Review Committee: consists of representatives of the
Planning Board, Zoning Board, Select Board, Building Commissioner and 3
at-large members.
Consultant RKG Associates
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
The Town completed a Housing Production Plan within the last year and
identified multiple options for developing new Affordable Housing units in
Town.  The Affordable Housing Committee has been reestablished and is
in the process of reviewing the goals and recommendations presented in
the plan with the objective of future implementation.  Strategies for
developing affordable housing included financial rehabilitation assistance,
inclusionary zoning, expanded multi-family zoning, and creating an
Affordable Housing Trust. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
The Hull Redevelopment Authority is developing a new urban renewal plan
which proposes to develop an urban renewal property under their control
with 150 units of multi-family housing that includes a retail component, new
open space, affordable units and a major overhaul of the roadway network
in the downtown area. 
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
b. An existing zoning district or districts that must be amended to comply
with the Section 3A Guidelines
3.1b. Please select the changes that
may be necessary for the existing
district to comply. Optional: Attach any
supporting documents that describe
this district.
District boundaries
Dimensional regulations
Other: units per acre
Explanation:
It is probable that a combination of several zoning changes will be
necessary to meet the requirements of the Section 3A Guidelines while
allowing for a development form that is acceptable to the community.
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Walkability, bike lanes, bus connections, accessibility, municipal services,
climate change and sea level rise, storm water, water supply, traffic, senior
and workforce housing. lighting.
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start

===== PAGE 4 =====
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Develop Zoning
Jan 18, 2023
Jun 30, 2023
Short Answer
Applying DHCD's compliance model to test for density and unit capacity
Jan 18, 2023
Jun 30, 2023
Short Answer
Public outreach/Planning Board Discussions
Jul 01, 2023
Oct 31, 2023
Short Answer
Holding planning board hearings
Nov 01, 2023
Jan 31, 2024
Short Answer
Finalize Draft/Check DHCD Compliance Model/Advisory Board/Insert
Warrant Language
Jan 01, 2024
Feb 29, 2024
Short Answer
Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant zoning /Town Meeting
May 01, 2024
May 31, 2024
Short Answer
Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Jun 01, 2024
Jun 30, 2024
If there is any other feedback you would
like to share about the compliance
process, please use this space to
provide it. 
Hull was chosen as a 3A Early Adopter Community and received technical
assistance from the Mass Housing Partnership to review initial proposals
the town had to comply with the 3A guidelines.  The resulting technical
memo outlined areas where the Town should focus its efforts.  The Town
received additional technical assistance to continue working with RKG
associates to develop a proposal that will meet the guidelines by the end of
2024.
