
===== PAGE 2 =====
Special Town Meeting Minutes November 19, 2024 
Page 2 of 24
Summary of Town Meeting Articles
ARTICLE
DESCRIPTION
COST
SOURCE
1
Establish MBTA Zoning District
N/A
N/A
2
Prior Years’ Bills
$9,155.18
Raise and Appropriate
3
Replacement of Elementary School Roof
$60,000
Free Cash
4
Supplement FY25 Operating Budget – Police
$173,516
Raise and Appropriate
5
Engineering and Related Costs Associated with a New 
Municipal Well for the Water Department 
$1,000,000
Borrowing
6
FY25 Transfer to Employment Liability Reserve Fund
$25,255
Unexpended Articles
7
FY25 Capital Equipment/Project Funding
$1,377,917
Free Cash and Capital Project
Stabilization Fund, Waterways
Improvement Fund, Overlay
8
Authorize Board of Health to Continue Participation in State
Septic Betterment Loan Program
$400,000
Massachusetts Clean Water
Trust - Title V Betterment Loan
Program
9
Change Maximum Retirement Age of Special Police Officers
N/A
N/A
10
Amend the Town of Kingston Zoning Bylaw, Residential 
Development Scheduling
N/A
N/A
11
FY25 Wage and Personnel By-Law; Amendments and 
Compensation Schedule
N/A
N/A
12
Transfer of Town Owned Land to Conservation
N/A
N/A
13
Reduce Waterfront Committee from Seven (7) to Five (5)
Members
N/A
N/A
14
Amend Public Health and Sanitation Bylaw
N/A
N/A
Call to order at 7:00 pm, there being a quorum of 228 voters in attendance, meeting quorum required, Moderator 
Sean O’Brien opened Annual Town Meeting, posted for and held at Kingston Intermediate School, 65 Second Brook
Street. The Moderator requested a moment of silence for all those suffering from Political, Economic and Social 
Challenges. He noted the Warrant has been properly posted, waived the reading of the Warrant. He then reviewed
the rules and regulations regarding behavior and participation according to Town Meeting Times and Local By-
Laws. The Moderator then requested;  “a moment of silence for those who have passed and for those residents of 
Kingston to continue to find the strength, resilience, and courage to endure through any personal struggles.”  
The Moderator introduced Selectmen Eric Crone for a presentation to Retiring Highway Superintendent Paul 
Basler. Mr Basler,  after 29 years employed and 23 years as Superintendent, was recognized for his fair, 
professional attitude and quality leadership skills and unmatched service to the town. Thomas Bott, former Town 
Planner and friend of Mr Basler was recognized and allowed to give a presentation on all Paul had done for the 
Town and individuals over the years, always going above and beyond. 
Tellers Paul Basler, James Soule and Kevin Flateau were sworn into service.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Special Town Meeting Minutes November 19, 2024 
Page 3 of 24
The following poll workers performed attendance check-in and door monitoring;
  Maureen Mauriello   Joseph Mauriella   Jane Corr    Joanne Guilfoy
Janet Holmes   Denbeigh Forbes   Maureen Twohig  Pricilla Brackett   Dan Bombadier
Assistant Town Clerk Janna Morrissey and Andrea Cunningham, Assistant to the Town Clerk supervised the check 
in and out.
OPENING MOTION
Motion By:  Eric Crone, Chair, Board of Selectmen
Move: that the following non-residents and non-registered voters be allowed to enter and address the Town 
Meeting:
Kate Feodoroff, Town Counsel    Keith Hickey, Town Administrator  Kathleen Barrett, Finance Director/Town 
Accountant,   David Walsh, Wastewater Department Superintendent,
Tina Betti, Human Resource Manager    Matthew Penella, Conservation Agent,
 Jill Proulx, Superintendent of Schools,   Sarah Hickey, Director of Business Services, SLRSD
Joyce Krystofolski, Health Agent    Brian Holmes, Chief of Police     Adam Hatch, Deputy Fire Chief   
Maureen Clarke, Principal Assessor   Robert Cuoco, Facilities Director,     Donald Colon, Library Director
Kristin Berger, Resilient CE (Water Dept.)
*With no debate, the Opening Motion carried on a Unanimous Voice Vote.*
                                                           ***********************************
ARTICLE 1
Establish MBTA Zoning District
Majority Vote
Motion By: Thomas Bouchard, Chair, Planning Board
Board of Selectmen – 2-3-0 Favorable Vote Planning
Board – 5-0-0 Favorable Vote
Move: the Town amend the Town of Kingston Zoning Bylaws as follows: (1) by adding terms relevant
to the new proposed MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) to Section 2
Definitions; (2) by modifying Section 3.1.B Overlay Zoning Districts under Section 3 Zoning Districts,
to add reference to the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overly District (MCMOD); (3) by modifying
Section 6 Overlay Districts 6.1.A to add a new MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District
(MCMOD); and (4) to amend the Town of Kingston Official Zoning Map to include the MCMOD Overlay
District as printed herein. 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Town of Kingston Zoning Bylaws as follows: (1) by adding terms relevant 
to the new proposed MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) to Section 2 Definitions; (2) by 
modifying Section 3.1.B Overlay Zoning Districts under Section 3 Zoning Districts, to add reference to the MBTA 
Communities Multi-family Overly District (MCMOD); (3) by modifying Section 6 Overlay Districts 6.1.A to add a new
MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD); and (4) to amend the Town of Kingston Official Zoning 
Map to include the MCMOD Overlay District, as follows.  

===== PAGE 4 =====
Special Town Meeting Minutes November 19, 2024 
Page 4 of 24
(1) Add the following definitions in Section 2 Definitions:
MBTA Community Definitions
Compliance Guidelines - Compliance Guidelines of EOHLC for Multi-Family Zoning Districts Under Section 3A of
the Zoning Act (MGL Ch. 40A Section 3A) as may be further revised or amended from time to time.  
EOHLC – Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities
Height
Original (Pre-Development) Grade: The level or elevation of the surface of the ground prior to 
construction, grading, filling, or other human-made alteration, from which the Height of a Structure or 
other topographical data shall be calculated. 
Reference plane: Represents the average of the original grade level adjoining the building at all exterior 
walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be 
established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot 
line is more than 6 feet (1829 mm) from the building between the structure and a point 6 feet (1829 mm) 
from the building 
Building, Height: The vertical dimension measured from the reference plane elevation of the lot at each 
face of the building to the top of roof assembly in the case of a flat roof; to the highest point of a mansard
roof; and to the average height between plate and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, regardless of the 
roof orientation to the street.  Please see Height Diagram, for reference. 
MBTA - Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.

===== PAGE 5 =====
Special Town Meeting Minutes November 19, 2024 
Page 5 of 24
Mixed Use - Development containing a mix of residential uses and nonresidential uses, including commercial, 
institutional, industrial, or other uses.  
Multi-family Housing - A building with 3 or more residential dwelling units or 2 or more 
buildings on the same lot with more than 1 residential dwelling unit in each building. 
Section 3A - Section 3A of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Zoning Act.
(2) Add the following new language under Section 3.1B Overlay Zoning Districts within Section 3 Zoning 
Districts: 
8. MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD)       
(3) Add the following new language under Section 6 Overlay Districts:
1.
Add reference to new Section 6.9 MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) 
under Section 6.1A.     
2.
Add new Section 6.9 as follows:
SECTION 6.9.0 MBTA COMMUNITIES MULTI-FAMILY OVERLAY DISTRICT (MCMOD)
6.9.0 
PURPOSE
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multifamily 
housing As of Right in accordance with G.L. c. 40A sec. 3A and the Compliance Guidelines of the Executive 
Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) to accomplish the following purposes: 
1.
Encourage the as-of-right production of multi-family housing in commercial areas and 
around existing residential neighborhoods. 
2.
Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and types to provide equal access to 
new housing throughout the community for people with a variety of needs and income 
levels. 
3.
Support vibrant neighborhoods by encouraging an appropriate mix and intensity of uses to 
support an active public space that provides equal access to housing, jobs, gathering spaces, 
recreational opportunities, goods, and services. 
4.
Preserve open space in a community by locating new housing within or adjacent to existing 
developed areas and infrastructure. 
5.
Support public investment in public transit and pedestrian- and bike-friendly infrastructure.
6.
Increase the municipal tax base through private investment and redevelopment in new 
residential developments in established neighborhoods and commercial areas.  
6.9.1 
ESTABLISHMENT AND APPLICABILITY
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 56.9 acres in size, consisting of 
Subdistricts A and Subdistrict B, that is superimposed over the underlying zoning district(s) and is shown 
on the Town of Kingston Official Zoning Map. 
1.
Applicability of MCMOD.

===== PAGE 6 =====
Special Town Meeting Minutes November 19, 2024 
Page 6 of 24
An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within a MCMOD in accordance with 
the provisions of this Section 6.9.0.
2.
Overlay District.
The MCMOD, consisting of Subdistrict A and Subdistrict B, is an overlay district 
superimposed on the underlying zoning district(s) and overlay district(s).  The regulations for
use, dimensions, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing the respective 
underlying zoning district shall remain in full force, except for uses allowed As of Right in the 
MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in Section 6.9.0 are governed by the requirements of 
the underlying zoning district(s).  
3.
The Planning Board is the Site Plan Review authority for the MCMOD.
6.9.2
APPLICABILITY OF OTHER OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Any MCMOD project shall comply with Sections 6.2 Floodplain Overlay District, 6.5
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Voltaic Installation Overlay District, 6.6 Mixed
Commerce Overlay District, 6.7 Mixed Use Redevelopment Overlay District, and 6.8 Water 
Resources Overlay District, to the maximum extent practicable.  Residential projects and 
residential components of mixed-use projects in the MCMOD are exempt from any requirement 
to obtain a Special Permit applicable to residential uses in said overlay districts.  
6.9.3
PERMITTED LAND USES
1.
Uses Permitted as of Right.
The following uses are permitted As of Right within Subdistrict A of the MCMOD:
a.
Multi-Family Housing up to 15 dwelling units per acre.
b.
Mixed-use development that includes the following commercial uses on the 
Ground Floor only and residential on all other floors:
1)
Recreational, social, or cultural facilities such as theaters, 
playhouses, band shells, outdoor pavilions, museums and 
community centers. 
2)
Personal service establishments.
3)
Establishments for the retail sale of merchandise.
4)
Convenience store.
5)
Educational use.
6)
Restaurant: sit down or limited service only (no drive-in or 
window service). 
7)
Indoor commercial recreation establishments.
8)
Business, professional or administrative offices.
9)
Grocery store.
10) Medical service or clinic.
The following uses are permitted As of Right within Subdistrict B of the MCMOD:
a.
Multi-Family Residential up to 16 dwelling units per acre.
b.
Mixed-use development including commercial uses as described in Section 
6.9.3.1.b. 

===== PAGE 12 =====
Page 12 of 24
4.
Buildings: Mixed-use development.
a.
In a mixed-use building, access to and egress from the residential 
component shall be clearly differentiated from access to other uses. 
Such differentiation may occur by using separate entrances or 
egresses from the building or within a lobby space shared among 
different uses. 
b.
Paved pedestrian access from the residential component shall be 
provided to residential parking and amenities and to the public 
sidewalk, as applicable.   
c.
Materials for non-residential uses shall be stored inside or under 
cover and shall not be accessible to residents of the development.  
d.
Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized so as to reduce 
the amount of impervious surface. Where possible, parking and 
loading areas shall be connected to minimize curb cuts onto public 
rights-of-way.  
5.
Buildings: Shared Outdoor Space. Multi-family housing and mixed-use 
development shall have common outdoor space that all residents can access. 
Such space may be located in any combination of ground floor, courtyard, 
rooftop, or terrace. All outdoor space shall count towards the project’s 
minimum Open Space requirement, and where practical, placed such that 
buildings face onto such space.  
6.
Buildings: Corner Lots. A building on a corner lot shall indicate a primary 
entrance either along one of the street-facing façades or on the primary 
corner as an entrance serving both streets.   
a.
Such entries shall be connected by a paved surface to the public 
sidewalk, if applicable.   
b.
All façades visible from a public right-of-way shall be treated with 
similar care and attention in terms of entries, fenestration, and 
materials.   
7.
Buildings: Infill Lots. If the adjacent buildings are set back at a distance that 
exceeds the minimum front yard requirements, infill buildings shall meet the 
requirements of Section 6.9.4 Density and Dimensional Standards. Otherwise,
infill buildings may match the setback line of either adjacent building, or an 
average of the setback of the two buildings to provide consistency along the 
street.  
8.
Buildings: Principal Façade and Parking. Parking shall be subordinate in design
and location to the principal building façade.  
a.
Surface parking. Surface parking shall be located to the rear or side 
of the principal building. The applicant shall identify the principal 
building in the site plan application. Parking shall not be located in
the setback between the building and any lot line adjacent to the 
public right-of-way. 
b.
Integrated garages. The principal pedestrian entry into the building 
shall be more prominent in design and placement than the vehicular 
entry into any garage.  
c.
Parking structures. Building(s) dedicated to structured parking on 
the same lot as one or more multi-family buildings or mixed-use 
development shall be subordinate in design and placement to the 
multi-family or mixed-use building(s) on the lot.  
9.
Signs.  All proposed signs within the MCMOD shall be subject to the standards
set forth in the Zoning Bylaw Section 9.4 Signs, unless a Master Sign Plan is 
submitted with the MCMOD Site Plan Application as described herein. 
A Master Sign Plan which details size specifications, types, and locations for 
wayfinding and for proposed buildings and accessways subject to the Site 
Plan Application may be submitted for approval of signage within the 
MCMOD.  Said Master Sign Plan may be subject to design peer review 
comments as part of the application process. 
10. Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant and subject to compliance with 
the Compliance Guidelines, the Planning Board may waive the requirements 
of this Section 6.9.6. General Development Standards, in the interests of 
design flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency
of such variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the MCMOD. 

===== PAGE 13 =====
Page 13 of 24
6.9.7 
     ADMINISTRATION
1.
Pre-Application Review.  The Applicant is encouraged to participate in a 
preapplication review at a regular meeting of the Planning Board.  The 
purpose of the pre-application review is to minimize the applicant’s cost of 
engineering and other technical experts, and to obtain the advice and 
direction of the Planning Board prior to filing the application.  At the pre-
application review the applicant shall outline the proposal and seek 
preliminary feedback from the Planning Board, other municipal review 
entities, and members of the public. 
2.
Applicability. Site Plan Review is required for all projects within the MCMOD. 
An application for Site Plan Review shall be reviewed by the Planning Board 
for consistency with the purpose and intent of Section 6.9, and will follow the
procedure for Site Plan Review, Section 10.3 of the Zoning Bylaw, and 
submittals shall contain a Narrative of compliance with the applicable design 
standards of this Section 6.9.7.  
3.
Timeline. Site Plan Review should be commenced no later than 45 days of the
submission of a complete application and should be completed expeditiously 
within 120 days of submission.  
4.
Site Plan Approval. Site Plan approval for uses listed in Section 6.9.3.1 
Permitted Uses shall be granted upon determination by the Site Plan Review 
Authority that the following conditions have been satisfied. The Planning 
Board may impose reasonable conditions, at the expense of the applicant, to 
ensure that these conditions have been satisfied.   
1.
The Applicant has submitted the required fees and information as 
set forth in Kingston’s requirements for a Zoning Permit and Site 
Plan Review; and  
2.
The project as described in the application meets the development 
standards set forth in Section 6.9.6. General Development 
Standards.  
5.
Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in this Site Plan Review 
submission, that a project be developed in phases subject to the approval of 
the Planning Board, provided that the submission shows the full buildout of 
the project and all associated impacts as of the completion of the final phase. 
6.
Enforcement.  Sections 10.1 and 10.2 of the Zoning Bylaw are applicable to 
the 
MCMOD.
6.9.8 
OTHER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
1.
Section 9.7 of the Zoning Bylaw Residential Development Scheduling shall not
apply to developments constructed in accordance with this Section 6.9.
2.
The following requirements shall apply to the development of affordable 
housing within the MCMOD:  Any application for construction of 10 or more 
dwelling units on one or more contiguous parcels in the MCMOD shall be 
subject to the provisions of Section 9.8 of the Zoning Bylaw, provided that a 
special permit shall not be required for uses within the MCMOD.
3.
Adult Uses under Section 7.4 of the Zoning Bylaw shall be required to adhere 
to a 500-foot setback to the MCMOD pursuant to 7.4.A(2)(a). 
6.9.9 
SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Section 6.9 is found to be invalid by a court of competent 
jurisdiction, the remainder of Section 6.9 shall not be affected but shall remain in full force.
The invalidity of any provision of this Section 6.9 shall not affect the validity of the 
remainder of Kingston’s Zoning Bylaw.
(4) Amend the Town of Kingston Zoning Map to add the following areas shown on maps on file with
the Town Clerk to the MBTA Communities Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD) as depicted below:

===== PAGE 14 =====
Page 14 of 24
At 7:23pm there were 368 voters checked in. With the motion and a second from the floor, Valerie Massard, Town 
Planner made a PowerPoint Presentation.  Ms. Massard mentioned the opportunities for redevelopment of the 
Mall and successful development, increasing the tax base. She informed the body that there was a major risk of 
losing grant and funding from the State and access to Infrastructure Funding currently set at $3.96 billion dollars.
Mr. Bouchard them addressed the body. His initial reaction to this article and approving the rezoning was very 
negative. However after much work by the Planning Staff, he realized that it was the best possible solution, He was
positive about the efforts/plans to utilize the property at the mall for development as opposed to the plowing of 
open space. He said it gives Kingston better control and deemphasizes the need for 40B projects. There was a great
deal of  debate both supporting and opposing the zoning change. Concerns for additional traffic, increase to 
student population and need for infrastructure improvements were voiced and addressed. Those supporting the 
article  had concerns that if the Town doesn’t they would be subject to loss of revenue, increased taxes, a potential
Override and law suits from the State.
** With a hand counted vote of 193 in favor and 167 opposed the motion carried **
Article 2
Subdistrict A
Subdistrict B
