
===== PAGE 1 =====
From:
Frank Streeter
To:
John Woodsmall
Cc:
Brian Keating
Subject:
Re: Lancaster - Conditional Compliance with Section 3A/MBTA Communities
Date:
Wednesday, December 17, 2025 5:30:14 PM
Hi John,
Thanks for the update. The PB is glad to hold whatever hearings are necessary to get this onto the ATM Warrant. 
Possibly we could rezone just a part of the DCAMM site to meet the MBTA requirements, but not the whole thing? Even if we rezone part of the site with 10% or 20% SHI instead of 25%,
couldn’t we get the full amount of affordable units we want through the RFP process even with the lower underlying limit? That might be easier to get through the ATM than modifying the
existing 40R zone as rezoning that area was very controversial. Given that Capital Group has done nothing with the site (including the 40R portion) and people no longer seem to think of them as
the solution to the Town’s financial difficulties, we might not want to revisit rezoning that site unless we really need to do so as it could be poking the proverbial bear. Keep us posted on what
advice you get from counsel about all this. thanks,  Frank
 
On Dec 17, 2025, at 4:38 PM, John Woodsmall <jwoodsmall@lancasterma.gov> wrote:
Hello All,
Attached is a determination by the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) of Lancaster's conditional compliance with the MBTA Communities
Law.
Lancaster created the North Lancaster Smart Growth Overlay District (40R) at its November 14, 2022 Special Town Meeting. As stated in the EOHLC letter: 
"Section 220-89 of the zoning bylaw requires that, absent a waiver, at least twenty-five percent of rental dwelling units constructed in rental developments are set aside as
deed restricted affordable. To encourage financial feasibility, Section 72.04(1)(b)2 of the Regulations caps the percentage of dwelling units that must be set aside as deed
restricted affordable at twenty percent, for smart growth zoning districts adopted after August 10, 2022."
Thus, the North Lancaster 40R district does not actually meet the MBTA Communities regulation requirements because it requires more than a 20-percent affordability
requirement for rental units (the 40R does contain a 20% affordability cap, but that applies only to owner occupied multi-dwelling units). 
One thing that I find a bit odd, is that they did not highlight Section 220-89A(4) of the zoning code, which states: "Across all projects containing at least 13 residential units,
whether ownership or rental, not less than 8% of all units shall be made affordable to eligible applicants at or below 60% AMI and the balance of the affordable units shall
be restricted to eligible applicants at or below 80% AMI." This section of the Town's code would seem to conflict with the MBTA Communities regulation Section 72.04(1)(b)
that the affordable income limit cannot be set less than 80% AMI. 
EOHLC is giving the Town a year from the date of the Letter to comply, or November 25, 2026. [A side note that this letter was not delivered to us until December 12,
despite being issued on November 25.]
As I currently see the situation, the Town has two options:
1. Amend the Section 220-89 of the North Lancaster 40R to reduce the affordability requirement from 25 to 20 percent for rental units.
a. We will have to investigate if 220-80A(4) would also have to be amended in order to remove the 60 percent AMI requirement on at least 8 percent of the units.
2. Re-zone a different area of Town for multi-family by right, but restrict affordability to no more than 10 percent of the units at the 80% AMI limit in that newly zoned
area. While that would be in contravention of the Town's Inclusion of Affordable Housing zoning bylaw, the MBTA Communities regulations won't allow for more than
10 percent affordable, unless within a 40R zone.
a. This different area could(?) be the DCAMM project area. However, it may be difficult to square away the Affordable Homes Act requirements with the MBTA
Communities requirements. Also, placing the 10 percent affordable limit on this area would also be contrary to what we have heard in terms of wanting the
DCAMM area to comply with the Town's Inclusion of Affordable Housing zoning bylaw.
I'll be working with Brian Keating and Town Counsel to research this further and come up with options for consideration at future Planning and Select Board meetings.
Ideally, it would be best I feel to have whatever change is pursued available for the Spring Town Meeting to decide. 
Thanks...
-John
John Woodsmall
Town Administrator
Prescott Building, 2nd Floor
701 Main Street, Lancaster, MA 01523
(978) 365-3326 ext. 1016
jwoodsmall@lancasterma.gov
Lancaster, MA | Official Website
<Outlook-lancaster_.png>
The contents of this email and any attachments are the property of the Town of Lancaster Massachusetts and subject to the Public Records Law, M.G.L. c. 66, section 10. When writing or responding,
please remember that the Massachusetts Secretary of State’s Office has determined that email is a public record and not confidential.
From: Carlucci, Nathan (EOHLC) <Nathan.Carlucci@mass.gov>
Sent: Friday, December 12, 2025 5:02 PM
To: John Woodsmall <jwoodsmall@lancasterma.gov>
Cc: Brian Keating <BKeating@lancasterma.gov>; john.cronin@masenate.gov <john.cronin@masenate.gov>; Kilcoyne, Meghan - Rep. (HOU) <meghan.kilcoyne@mahouse.gov>
Subject: Lancaster - Conditional Compliance with Section 3A/MBTA Communities
 
Good Afternoon, Town Administrator Woodsmall - 
Attached is a letter from Secretary Augustus documenting Lancaster's conditional compliance with the MBTA communities law. Our team is happy to meet with and work with you or
your staff to discuss working through the minor issue flagged.
Best,
Nathan Carlucci
MBTA Communities Compliance Coordinator

===== PAGE 2 =====
Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities
Livable Communities Division
nathan.carlucci@mass.gov
 
The contents of this email and any attachments are the property of the Town of Lancaster Massachusetts and subject to the Public Records Law, M.G.L. c. 66, section 10. When writing or
responding, please remember that the Massachusetts Secretary of State’s Office has determined that email is a public record and not confidential. <Lancaster - Determination of
Conditional Compliance.pdf>
