
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
DRAFT as of 02/19/2025- Subject to change 
Section 1.3: MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District 
A. Purpose 
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow 
multifamily housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts 
General Laws Chapter 40A). 
 
B. Establishment and Applicability 
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of 28.5 acres superimposed over the 
underlying zoning districts and shown on the Zoning Map. 
1. Applicability of MCMOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing located 
within a MCMOD in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.3. 
2. Underlying Zoning. The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying zoning 
districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw 
governing the respective underlying zoning districts shall remain in full force, except for 
uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the MCMOD. Uses that are not identiﬁed in 
Section 1.3 are governed by the requirements of the underlying zoning districts. 
3. Sub-districts. The MCMOD contains the following sub-districts, all of which are 
shown on the MCMOD Boundary Map: 
a. District 1: 424 Main Street  
b. District 2: 190 Main Street 
c. District 3: 69 Main Street 
 
C. Permitted Uses 
1. Uses Permitted as of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the 
MCMOD. 
a. Multi-family housing  
b. Mixed-use development. Mixed-used development consisting of a mix of multi-
family housing and commercial, dining, or office development is allowed as of right 
in the MCMOD. Individual non-residential uses within the mixed-use development 
are subject to the same permitting requirements as the underlying zoning. 
 
D. Dimensional Standards  
1. Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this 
Zoning, the dimensional requirements applicable in the MCMOD are as follows:  
 
District 1 
District 2 
District 2 
Min. Lot Size  
10,000 square feet 
10,000 square feet 
10,000 square feet 
Lot Size per 
Dwelling Unit 
2,000 square feet per 
add’l unit over 4 units 
2,000 square feet per 
add’l unit over 4 units 
2,000 square feet per 
add’l unit over 4 units 
Max. Coverage 
30% 
30% 
30% 
Min. Frontage 
100 feet 
100 feet 
100 feet 
Front Setback 
10 feet 
10 feet 
10 feet 
Side Setback 
10 feet 
10 feet 
10 feet 
Rear Setback 
10 feet 
10 feet 
10 feet 
Max. Height 
4 stories 
4 stories 
4 stories 
 
2. Multi-Building Lots. In the MCMOD, lots may have more than one principal building. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
DRAFT as of 02/19/2025- Subject to change 
3. Exceptions. The limitation on height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, ventilators, 
towers, silos, spires, or other ornamental features of buildings, which features are in no way 
used for living purposes and do not constitute more than 25% of the ground ﬂoor area of the 
building. The Site Plan Review Authority may waive the height and setbacks standards to 
accommodate the installation of solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, living, and other eco-
roofs, energy storage, and air-source heat pump equipment. Such installations shall not 
create a signiﬁcant detriment to abutters in terms of noise or shadow and must be 
appropriately integrated into the architecture of the building and the layout of the site. The 
installations shall not provide additional habitable space within the development. 
 
E. Off-Street Parking 
These parking requirements are applicable to development in the MCMOD  
1. Number of parking spaces. The following maximum numbers of off-street parking 
spaces shall be permitted by use in surface parking:  
Use 
Maximum Spaces 
Multi-family 
1.2 spaces per Residential Dwelling Unit, rounded up to the 
nearest integer. 
Mixed-use/Commercial 
Sum of uses computed separately. See 2, below. 
 
2. Shared Parking within a Mixed-Use Development. Parking requirements for a mix 
of uses on a single site may be adjusted through the Site Plan Review process, if the 
applicant can demonstrate that shared spaces will meet parking demands by using 
accepted methodologies. 
 
F. General Development Standards 
1. Development standards in the MCMOD are applicable to all multi-family development with 
more than 6 units or mixed-use development of more than 14,000 square feet within the 
MCMOD. These standards are components of the Site Plan Review process in Section 1.3 I. 
Site Plan Review. 
2. Site Design. 
a. Connections. Sidewalks shall provide direct connections among building 
entrances, the public sidewalk if applicable, bicycle storage, and parking. 
b. Vehicular access. Where feasible, curb cuts shall be minimized, and shared 
driveways encouraged. 
c. Open Space. 
d. Screening for Parking. Surface parking adjacent to a public sidewalk shall be 
screened by a landscaped buffer of sufficient width to allow the healthy 
establishment of trees, shrubs, and perennials, but no less than 6 (six) feet. The 
buffer may include a fence or wall of no more than three feet in height unless there 
is a signiﬁcant grade change between the parking and the sidewalk. 
e. Parking Materials. The parking surface may be concrete, asphalt, decomposed 
granite, bricks, or pavers, including pervious materials but not including grass or soil 
not contained within a paver or other structure. 
f. Plantings. Plantings shall include species that are native or adapted to the region. 
Plants on the Massachusetts Prohibited Plant List, as may be amended, shall be 
prohibited. 
g. Lighting. Light levels shall meet or exceed the minimum design guidelines deﬁned 
by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) and shall provide 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
DRAFT as of 02/19/2025- Subject to change 
adjacent properties, and other information commonly required by Municipality for 
Site Plan Review. 
c. Elevations of the buildings showing the architectural design of the building. 
d. All site plans shall be prepared by a certiﬁed architect, landscape architect, and/or 
a civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All landscape 
plans shall be prepared by a certiﬁed landscape architect registered in the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All building elevations shall be prepared by a 
certiﬁed architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All plans 
shall be signed and stamped, and drawings prepared at a scale of one-inch equals 
forty feet (1"=40') or larger, or at a scale as approved in advance by the Permitting 
Authority. 
e. Narrative of compliance with the applicable design standards of this Section 1.3. 
3. Timeline. Site Plan Review should commence no later than 30 days of the submission of a 
complete application and should be completed expeditiously. The site plan review authority 
may, when appropriate, seek the input of other municipal boards or officials. In general, site 
plan review should be completed no more than 6 months after the submission of the 
application. 
4. Site Plan Approval. Site Plan approval for uses listed in Section 1.3 D Permitted Uses shall 
be granted upon determination by the Site Plan Review Authority that the following 
conditions have been satisﬁed. The Site Plan Review Authority may impose reasonable 
conditions, at the expense of the applicant, to ensure that these conditions have been 
satisﬁed: the project described in the application meets the development standards set 
forth in Section 1.3 G. General Development Standards  
5. Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Site Plan Review submission, that a 
project be developed in phases subject to the approval of the Site Plan Review Authority, 
provided that the submission shows the full buildout of the project and all associated 
impacts as of the completion of the ﬁnal phase. However, no project may be phased solely 
to avoid the provisions of Section 1.3 H. Affordability Requirements.  
 
I. Severability. 
1. If any provision of this Section 1.3 is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, 
the remainder of Section 1.3 shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. The 
invalidity of any provision of this Section 1.3 shall not affect the validity of the remainder of 
the Leicester Zoning Bylaws. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
DRAFT as of 02/19/2025- Subject to change 
New Deﬁnitions. 
1. Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded in 
its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or 
household of a speciﬁed income, or both. 
2. Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as deﬁned by this Section 1.3. 
3. Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site Plan 
Review, or Special Permit. 
4. Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan 
statistical region that includes the Town of Leicester, as deﬁned by the U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
5. As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of application 
without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other 
discretionary zoning approval. 
6. Building coverage. The maximum area of the lot that can be attributed to the 
footprint of the buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building Coverage 
does not include surface parking. 
7. Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts Under 
Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time. 
8. EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities. 
9. Lot. An area of land with deﬁnite boundaries that is used or available for use as the site of a 
building or buildings. 
10. MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
11. Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and 
nonresidential uses, including commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses. 
12. Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or 
more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each 
building. 
13. Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay district, in 
which multi-family housing is allowed as of right. 
14. Open space. Contiguous undeveloped land within a parcel boundary. 
15. Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the 
space. A solar panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not 
count as a built structure for the purposes of this deﬁnition. 
16. Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for 
one or more people, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking. 
and sanitation. 
17. Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
18. Site plan review authority. Leicester Planning Board 
19. Special permit granting authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall include the 
Leicester Planning Board as designated by the Zoning Bylaws for the issuance of special 
permits. 
20. Sub-district. An area within the MCMOD that is geographically smaller than the MCMOD 
district and differentiated from the rest of the district by use, dimensional standards, or 
development standards. 
21. Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualiﬁed Affordable Housing Units 
maintained by EOHLC used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate-income 
housing for the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law. 
 
