
===== PAGE 1 =====
Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF HOUSING &  
LIVABLE COMMUNITIES 
 
                    Maura T. Healey, Governor    Kimberley Driscoll, Lieutenant Governor    Edward M. Augustus, Jr., Secretary 
 
Issue Date: August 10, 2022 
Revised:  October 21, 2022 
Revised:  August 17, 2023 
 
 
Compliance Guidelines for Multi-family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
 
1. 
Overview of Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
 
Section 3A of the Zoning Act provides:  An MBTA community shall have a zoning ordinance or 
by-law that provides for at least 1 district of reasonable size in which multi-family housing is permitted 
as of right; provided, however, that such multi-family housing shall be without age restrictions and shall 
be suitable for families with children. For the purposes of this section, a district of reasonable size shall: 
(i) have a minimum gross density of 15 units per acre, subject to any further limitations imposed 
by section 40 of chapter 131 and title 5 of the state environmental code established pursuant to section 
13 of chapter 21A; and (ii) be located not more than 0.5 miles from a commuter rail station, subway 
station, ferry terminal or bus station, if applicable. 
 
The purpose of Section 3A is to encourage the production of multi-family housing by requiring 
MBTA communities to adopt zoning districts where multi-family housing is allowed as of right, and that 
meet other requirements set forth in the statute. 
 
The Department of Housing and Community DevelopmentExecutive Office of Housing and 
Livable Communities (EOHLC), in consultation with Executive Office of Economic Development,  the 
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority and the Massachusetts Department of Transportation, is 
required to promulgate guidelines to determine if an MBTA community is in compliance with Section 
3A.  DHCDEOHLC promulgated preliminary guidance on January 29, 2021.  DHCDEOHLC updated 
that preliminary guidance on December 15, 2021, and on that same date issued draft guidelines for 
public comment.  These final guidelines supersede all prior guidance and set forth how MBTA 
communities may achieve compliance with Section 3A. 
 
2. 
Definitions 
 
“Adjacent community” means an MBTA community that (i) has within its boundaries less than 
100 acres of developable station area, and (ii) is not an adjacent small town. 
 
“Adjacent small town” means an MBTA community that (i) has within its boundaries less than 
100 acres of developable station area, and (ii) either has a population density of less than 500 persons 
per square mile, or a population of not more than 7,000 year-round residents as determined in the most 
recently published United States Decennial Census of Population and Housing. 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
“Affordable unit” means a multi-family housing unit that is subject to a restriction in its chain of 
title limiting the sale price or rent, or limiting occupancy to an individual or household of a specified 
income, or both.  Affordable units may be, but are not required to be, eligible for inclusion on 
DHCDEOHLC’s Subsidized Housing Inventory.  Nothing in these Guidelines changes the Subsidized 
Housing Inventory eligibility criteria, and no affordable unit shall be counted on the Subsidized Housing 
Inventory unless it satisfies the requirements for inclusion under 760 CMR 56.03(2) or any other 
regulation or guidance issued by DHCDEOHLC. 
 
“Age-restricted housing” means any housing unit encumbered by a title restriction requiring a 
minimum age for some or all occupants. 
 
“As of right” means development that may proceed under a zoning ordinance or by-law without 
the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary zoning 
approval. 
 
“Bus station” means a location with a passenger platform and other fixed infrastructure serving 
as a point of embarkation for the MBTA Silver Line. Upon the request of an MBTA community, 
DHCDEOHLC, in consultation with the MBTA, may determine that other locations qualify as a bus 
station if (i) such location has a sheltered platform or other fixed infrastructure serving a point of 
embarkation for a high-capacity MBTA bus line, and (ii) the area around such fixed infrastructure is 
highly suitable for multi-family housing. 
 
“Commuter rail community” means an MBTA community that (i) does not meet the criteria for a 
rapid transit community, and (ii) has within its borders at least 100 acres of developable station area 
associated with one or more commuter rail stations.   
 
“Commuter rail station” means any MBTA commuter rail station with year-round, rather than 
intermittent, seasonal, or event-based, service, including stations under construction and scheduled to 
being service before the end of 2023, but not including existing stations at which service will be 
terminated, or reduced below regular year-round service, before the end of 2023. 
 
“Compliance model” means the model created by DHCDEOHLC to determine compliance with 
Section 3A’s reasonable size, gross density, and location requirements.  The compliance model is 
described in further detail in Appendix 2. 
 
“Determination of compliance” means a determination made by DHCDEOHLC as to whether an 
MBTA community has a multi-family zoning district that complies with the requirements of Section 3A.  
A determination of compliance may be determination of interim compliance or a determination of 
district compliance, as described in section 9. 
 
“Developable land” means land on which multi-family housing can be permitted and 
constructed.  For purposes of these guidelines, developable land consists of: (i) all privately-owned land 
except lots or portions of lots that meet the definition of excluded land, and (ii) developable public land. 
 
“Developable public land” means any publicly-owned land that (i) is used by a local housing 
authority; (ii) has been identified as a site for housing development in a housing production plan 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
approved by DHCDEOHLC; or (iii) has been designated by the public owner for disposition and 
redevelopment. Other publicly-owned land may qualify as developable public land if DHCDEOHLC 
determines, at the request of an MBTA community and after consultation with the public owner, that 
such land is the location of obsolete structures or uses, or otherwise is suitable for conversion to multi-
family housing, and will be converted to or made available for multi-family housing within a reasonable 
period of time. 
 
 
“Developable station area” means developable land that is within 0.5 miles of a transit station. 
 
“DHCDEOHLC” means the Department Executive Office Executive Office of Housing and 
Community DevelopmentLivable Communities. 
 
“EOHEDEOED” means the Executive Office of Housing and Economic Development. 
 
“Excluded land” means land areas on which it is not possible or practical to construct multi-
family housing.  For purposes of these guidelines, excluded land is defined by reference to the 
ownership, use codes, use restrictions, and hydrological characteristics in MassGIS and consists of the 
following: 
 
(i) 
All publicly-owned land, except for lots or portions of lots determined to be developable 
public land. 
(ii) 
All rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and other surface waterbodies. 
(iii) 
All wetland resource areas, together with a buffer zone around wetlands and waterbodies 
equivalent to the minimum setback required by title 5 of the state environmental code. 
(iv) 
Protected open space and recreational land that is legally protected in perpetuity (for 
example, land owned by a local land trust or subject to a conservation restriction), or that 
is likely to remain undeveloped due to functional or traditional use (for example, 
cemeteries). 
(v) 
All public rights-of-way and private rights-of-way. 
(vi) 
Privately-owned land on which development is prohibited to protect private or public 
water supplies, including, but not limited to, Zone I wellhead protection areas and Zone 
A surface water supply protection areas. 
(vii) 
Privately-owned land used for educational or institutional uses such as a hospital, prison, 
electric, water, wastewater or other utility, museum, or private school, college or 
university. 
 
“Ferry terminal” means the location where passengers embark and disembark from regular, year-
round MBTA ferry service.   
 
“Gross density” means a units-per-acre density measurement that includes land occupied by 
public rights-of-way and any recreational, civic, commercial, and other nonresidential uses. 
 
“Housing suitable for families” means housing comprised of residential dwelling units that are 
not age-restricted housing, and for which there are no zoning restriction on the number of bedrooms, the 
size of bedrooms, or the number of occupants. 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
“Listed funding sources” means (i) the Housing Choice Initiative as described by the governor in 
a message to the general court dated December 11, 2017; (ii) the Local Capital Projects Fund established 
in section 2EEEE of chapter 29; and (iii) the MassWorks infrastructure program established in section 
63 of chapter 23A.   
 
“Lot” means an area of land with definite boundaries that is used or available for use as the site 
of a building or buildings.   
 
“MassGIS data” means the comprehensive, statewide database of geospatial information and 
mapping functions maintained by the Commonwealth's Bureau of Geographic Information, within 
the Executive Office of Technology Services and Security, including the lot boundaries and use codes 
provided by municipalities. 
 
“MBTA” means the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
  
“MBTA community” means a city or town that is: (i) one of the 51 cities and towns as defined in 
section 1 of chapter 161A; (ii) one of the 14 cities and towns as defined in said section 1 of said chapter 
161A; (iii) other served communities as defined in said section 1 of said chapter 161A; or (iv) a 
municipality that has been added to the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority under section 6 of 
chapter 161A or in accordance with any special law relative to the area constituting the authority. 
 
“Mixed-use development” means development containing a mix of residential uses and non-
residential uses, including, without limitation, commercial, institutional, industrial or other uses. 
 
''Mixed-use development zoning district” means a zoning district where multiple residential units 
are allowed as of right if, but only if, combined with non-residential uses, including, without limitation, 
commercial, institutional, industrial or other uses. 
 
“Multi-family housing” means a building with 3 or more residential dwelling units or 2 or more 
buildings on the same lot with more than 1 residential dwelling unit in each building. 
 
“Multi-family unit capacity” means an estimate of the total number of multi-family housing units 
that can be developed as of right within a multi-family zoning district, made in accordance with the 
requirements of section 5.b below. 
 
“Multi-family zoning district” means a zoning district, including a base district or an overlay 
district, in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right; provided that the district shall be in a fixed 
location or locations, and shown on a map that is part of the zoning ordinance or by-law. 
 
 
“One Stop Application” means the single application portal for the Community One Stop for 
Growth through which (i) the Executive Office of Housing and Economic Development considers 
requests for funding from the MassWorks infrastructure program; (ii) DHCDEOHLC considers requests 
for funding from the Housing Choice Initiative, (iii) EOHED EOED, DHCDEOHLC and other state 
agencies consider requests for funding from other discretionary grant programs. 
 

===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
 
“Private rights-of-way” means land area within which private streets, roads and other ways have 
been laid out and maintained, to the extent such land areas can be reasonably identified by examination 
of available tax parcel data.   
 
 
“Publicly-owned land” means (i) any land owned by the United States or a federal agency or 
authority; (ii) any land owned by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or a state agency or authority; 
and (iii) any land owned by a municipality or municipal board or authority. 
 
 
“Public rights-of-way” means land area within which public streets, roads and other ways have 
been laid out and maintained, to the extent such land areas can be reasonably identified by examination 
of available tax parcel data.   
 
 
“Rapid transit community” means an MBTA community that has within its borders at least 100 
acres of developable station area associated with one or more subway stations, or MBTA Silver Line bus 
rapid transit stations. 
 
“Residential dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities 
for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and 
sanitation. 
 
“Section 3A” means section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
 
“Sensitive land” means developable land that, due to its soils, slope, hydrology, or other physical 
characteristics, has significant conservation values that could be impaired, or vulnerabilities that could 
be exacerbated, by the development of multi-family housing.  It also includes locations where multi-
family housing would be at increased risk of damage caused by flooding.  Sensitive land includes, but is 
not limited to, wetland buffer zones extending beyond the title 5 setback area; land subject to flooding 
that is not a wetland resource area; priority habitat for rare or threatened species; DEP-approved 
wellhead protection areas in which development may be restricted, but is not prohibited (Zone II and 
interim wellhead protection areas); and land areas with prime agricultural soils that are in active 
agricultural use.  
 
“Site plan review” means a process established by local ordinance or by-law by which a local 
board reviews, and potentially imposes conditions on, the appearance and layout of a specific project 
prior to the issuance of a building permit.   
 
“Subway station” means any of the stops along the MBTA Red Line, Green Line, Orange Line, 
or Blue Line, including any extensions to such lines now under construction and scheduled to begin 
service before the end of 2023. 
 
“Transit station” means an MBTA subway station, commuter rail station, ferry terminal or bus 
station.  
 
“Transit station area” means the land area within 0.5 miles of a transit station. 
 
“Zoning Act” means chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
 
3. 
General Principles of Compliance 
 
These compliance guidelines describe how an MBTA community can comply with the 
requirements of Section 3A.  The guidelines specifically address: 
 
 What it means to allow multi-family housing “as of right.” 
 
 The metrics that determine if a multi-family zoning district is “of reasonable size.” 
 
 How to determine if a multi-family zoning district has a minimum gross density of 15 units 
per acre, subject to any further limitations imposed by section 40 of chapter 131 and title 5 of 
the state environmental code. 
 The meaning of Section 3A’s mandate that “such multi-family housing shall be without age 
restrictions and shall be suitable for families with children.” 
 
 The extent to which MBTA communities have flexibility to choose the location of a multi-
family zoning district. 
 
The following general principles have informed the more specific compliance criteria that 
follow: 
 
 MBTA communities with subway stations, commuter rail stations and other transit stations 
benefit from having these assets located within their boundaries and should provide 
opportunity for multi-family housing development around these assets.  MBTA communities 
with no transit stations within their boundaries benefit from proximity to transit stations in 
nearby communities.  
 
 The multi-family zoning districts required by Section 3A should encourage the development 
of multi-family housing projects of a scale, density and aesthetic that are compatible with 
existing surrounding uses, and minimize impacts to sensitive land.   
 
 “Reasonable size” is a relative rather than an absolute determination.  Because of the 
diversity of MBTA communities, a multi-family zoning district that is “reasonable” in one 
city or town may not be reasonable in another city or town.   
 
 When possible, multi-family zoning districts should be in areas that have safe, accessible, 
and convenient access to transit stations for pedestrians and bicyclists.  
 
4. 
Allowing Multi-Family Housing “As of Right”  
 
 
To comply with Section 3A, a multi-family zoning district must allow multi-family housing “as 
of right,” meaning that the construction and occupancy of multi-family housing is allowed in that district 
without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary 
approval.  DHCDEOHLC will determine whether zoning provisions allow for multi-family housing as 
of right consistent with the following guidelines. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
 
 
a. 
Site plan review 
 
The Zoning Act does not establish nor recognize site plan review as an independent method of 
regulating land use. However, the Massachusetts courts have recognized site plan review as a 
permissible regulatory tool, including for uses that are permitted as of right.  The court decisions 
establish that when site plan review is required for a use permitted as of right, site plan review involves 
the regulation of a use and not its outright prohibition.  The scope of review is therefore limited to 
imposing reasonable terms and conditions on the proposed use, consistent with applicable case law.1  
These guidelines similarly recognize that site plan review may be required for multi-family housing 
projects that are allowed as of right, within the parameters established by the applicable case law.  Site 
plan approval may regulate matters such as vehicular access and circulation on a site, architectural 
design of a building, and screening of adjacent properties.  Site plan review should not unreasonably 
delay a project nor impose conditions that make it infeasible or impractical to proceed with a project that 
is allowed as of right and complies with applicable dimensional regulations.   
 
b. 
Affordability requirements 
 
Section 3A does not include any express requirement or authorization for an MBTA community 
to require affordable units in a multi-family housing project that is allowed as of right.  It is a common 
practice in many cities and towns to require affordable units in a multi-family project that requires a 
special permit, or as a condition for building at greater densities than the zoning otherwise would allow.  
These inclusionary zoning requirements serve the policy goal of increasing affordable housing 
production.  If affordability requirements are excessive, however, they can make it economically 
infeasible to construct new multi-family housing. 
 
For purposes of making compliance determinations with Section 3A, DHCDEOHLC will 
consider an affordability requirement to be consistent with as of right zoning as long as the zoning 
requires not more than 10 percent of the units in a project to be affordable units, and the cap on the 
income of families or individuals who are eligible to occupy the affordable units is not less than 80 
percent of area median income.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, DHCDEOHLC may, in its discretion, 
approve a greater percentage of affordable units, or deeper affordability for some or all of the affordable 
units, in either of the following circumstances: 
 
(i)  
The affordability requirements applicable in the multi-family zoning district are reviewed 
and approved by DHCDEOHLC as part of a smart growth district under chapter 40R, or 
under another zoning incentive program administered by DHCDEOHLC; or 
 
(ii)   
The affordability requirements applicable in the multi-family zoning district are 
supported by an economic feasibility analysis, prepared for the municipality by a 
qualified and independent third party acceptable to DHCDEOHLC, and using a 
methodology and format acceptable to DHCDEOHLC.  The analysis must demonstrate 
 
1   See, e.g., Y.D. Dugout, Inc. v. Board of Appeals of Canton, 357 Mass. 25 (1970); Prudential Insurance Co. of America v. 
Board of Appeals of Westwood, 23 Mass. App. Ct. 278 (1986); Osberg v. Planning Bd. of Sturbridge, 44 Mass. App. Ct. 56, 
59 (1997) (Planning Board “may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the proposed use, but it does not have 
discretionary power to deny the use”). 

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 
that a reasonable variety of multi-family housing types can be feasibly developed at the 
proposed affordability levels, taking into account the densities allowed as of right in the 
district, the dimensional requirements applicable within the district, and the minimum 
number of parking spaces required. 
 
In no case will DHCDEOHLC approve alternative affordability requirements that require more 
than 20 percent of the units in a project to be affordable units, except in a smart growth zoning district 
under chapter 40R with a 25 percent affordability requirement approved and adopted prior to the 
issuance of these guidelines, including any such existing district that is expanded or amended to comply 
with these guidelines.  
 
c. 
Other requirements that do not apply uniformly in the multi-family zoning district 
 
Zoning will not be deemed compliant with Section 3A’s requirement that multi-family housing 
be allowed as of right if the zoning imposes requirements on multi-family housing that are not generally 
applicable to other uses.  The following are examples of requirements that would be deemed to be 
inconsistent with “as of right” use: (i) a requirement that multi-family housing meet higher energy 
efficiency standards than other uses; (ii) a requirement that a multi-family use achieve a third party 
certification that is not required for other uses in the district; and (iii) a requirement that multi-family use 
must be combined with commercial or other uses on the same lot or as part of a single project.  Mixed 
use projects may be allowed as of right in a multi-family zoning district, as long as multi-family housing 
is separately allowed as of right.   
 
5. 
Determining “Reasonable Size” 
 
 
In making determinations of “reasonable size,” DHCDEOHLC will take into consideration both 
the land area of the multi-family zoning district, and the multi-family zoning district’s multi-family unit 
capacity.   
 
a. 
 Minimum land area 
 
A zoning district is a specifically delineated land area with uniform regulations and requirements 
governing the use of land and the placement, spacing, and size of buildings.  For purposes of compliance 
with Section 3A, a multi-family zoning district should be a neighborhood-scale district, not a single 
development site on which the municipality is willing to permit a particular multi-family project.  
DHCDEOHLC will certify compliance with Section 3A only if an MBTA community’s multi-family 
zoning district meets the minimum land area applicable to that MBTA community, if any, as set forth in 
Appendix 1.  The minimum land area for each MBTA community has been determined as follows:  
 
(i) 
In rapid transit communities, commuter rail communities, and adjacent communities, the 
minimum land area of the multi-family zoning district is 50 acres, or 1.5% of the 
developable land in an MBTA community, whichever is less.  In certain cases, noted in 
Appendix 1, a smaller minimum land area applies. 
 
(ii) 
In adjacent small towns, there is no minimum land area.  In these communities, the multi-
family zoning district may comprise as many or as few acres as the community 

===== PAGE 9 =====
9 
determines is appropriate, as long as the district meets the applicable minimum multi-
family unit capacity and the minimum gross density requirements. 
 
In all cases, at least half of the multi-family zoning district land areas must comprise contiguous 
lots of land.  No portion of the district that is less than 5 contiguous acres land will count toward the 
minimum size requirement.  If the multi-family unit capacity and gross density requirements can be 
achieved in a district of fewer than 5 acres, then the district must consist entirely of contiguous lots. 
 
b. 
Minimum multi-family unit capacity 
 
A reasonably sized multi-family zoning district must also be able to accommodate a reasonable 
number of multi-family housing units as of right.  For purposes of determinations of compliance with 
Section 3A, DHCDEOHLC will consider a reasonable multi-family unit capacity for each MBTA 
community to be a specified percentage of the total number of housing units within the community, with 
the applicable percentage based on the type of transit service in the community, as shown on Table 1:  
 
Table 1. 
Category 
Percentage of total housing units 
Rapid transit community 
25% 
Commuter rail community 
15% 
Adjacent community 
10% 
Adjacent small town 
5% 
 
To be deemed in compliance with Section 3A, each MBTA community must have a multi-family 
zoning district with a multi-family unit capacity equal to or greater than the minimum unit capacity 
shown for it in Appendix 1.  The minimum multi-family unit capacity for each MBTA community has 
been determined as follows: 
 
(i) 
First, by multiplying the number of housing units in that community by 0.25, 0.15, 0.10, 
or .05 depending on the MBTA community category.  For example, a rapid transit 
community with 7,500 housing units is required to have a multi-family zoning district 
with a multi-family unit capacity of 7,500 x 0.25 = 1,875 multi-family units.  For 
purposes of these guidelines, the number of total housing units in each MBTA 
community has been established by reference to the most recently published United 
States Decennial Census of Population and Housing. 
 
(ii) 
Second, when there is a minimum land area applicable to an MBTA community, by 
multiplying that minimum land area (up to 50 acres) by Section 3A’s minimum gross 
density requirement of 15 units per acre.  The product of that multiplication creates a 
floor on multi-family unit capacity.  For example, an MBTA community with a minimum 
land area of 40 acres must have a district with a multi-family unit capacity of at least 600 
(40 x 15) units.   
 
(iii) 
The minimum unit capacity applicable to each MBTA community is the greater of the 
numbers resulting from steps (i) and (ii) above, but subject to the following limitation:  In 
no case does the minimum multi-family unit capacity exceed 25% of the total housing 

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 
units in that MBTA community.    
 
Example:  The minimum multi-family unit capacity for an adjacent community with 1,000 
housing units and a minimum land area of 50 acres is determined as follows:(i) first, by multiplying 
1,000 x .1 = 100 units; (ii) second, by multiplying 50 x 15 = 750 units;(iii) by taking the larger number, 
but adjusting that number down, if necessary, so that unit capacity is no more than 25% of 1,000 = 250 
units.  In this case, the adjustment in step (iii) results in a minimum unit capacity of 250 units. 
 
c. Reasonable Size – Consideration Given to Unit Capacity in Mixed-Use Development Districts 
 
In making determinations of whether an MBTA Community has a multi-family zoning district of 
“reasonable size” under this section, EOHLC shall also take into consideration the existence and impact 
of mixed-use development zoning districts, subject to the requirements below.   
 
EOHLC shall take these mixed-use development districts into consideration as reducing the unit 
capacity needed for a multi-family zoning district to be “reasonable” (as listed in Appendix I) where:  
 
(i)  
the mixed-use development zoning district is in an eligible location where existing 
village-style or downtown development is essential to preserve pedestrian access to 
amenities;  
 
(ii)  
there are no age restrictions or limits on unit size, number of bedrooms, bedroom size or 
number of occupants and the residential units permitted are suitable for families with 
children;   
 
(iii)  
mixed-used development in the district is allowed “as of right” as that phrase has been 
interpreted by EOHLC (for example, in section 4(c) with respect to affordability 
requirements);  
 
(iv)  
the requirement for non-residential uses is limited to the ground floor of buildings, and in 
no case represents a requirement that more than thirty-three percent of the floor area of a 
building, lot, or project must be for non-residential uses;  
 
(v)  
the requirement for non-residential uses does not preclude a minimum of three residential 
dwelling units per lot;  
 
(vi)  
the requirement for non-residential uses allows a broad mix of non-residential uses as-of-
right in keeping with the nature of the area; and  
 
(vii)  there are no minimum parking requirements associated with the non-residential uses 
allowed as of right.  
 
An MBTA community asking to reduce the unit capacity requirement for its multi-family zoning 
district(s) based on the unit capacity for one or more mixed-use development districts shall submit to 
EOHLC, on a form to be provided by EOHLC, a request for a determination that the mixed-use 
development district is in an eligible location meeting the requirements of subparagraph (i).  This 
request must be submitted at least 90 days prior to the vote of the MBTA community’s legislative body.  

===== PAGE 11 =====
11 
An MBTA community also may submit a broader inquiry as to Section 3A compliance in accordance 
with section 9(b).  EOHLC shall respond prior to the vote of the MBTA community’s legislative body if 
the request is timely submitted. 
 
In any community with both a multi-family zoning district and a mixed-use development district 
that meets these considerations, the unit capacity requirement for the multi-family zoning district listed 
in Appendix I shall be reduced by the lesser of  
 
(i)  
the unit capacity of residential dwelling units in the mixed-use development district or 
subdistrict (as calculated by EOHLC using a methodology similar to that in section 5(d) 
which takes into account the impact of non-residential uses), or  
 
(ii)  
twenty five percent of the unit capacity requirement listed in Appendix I.  This 
consideration shall not affect the minimum land area acreage or contiguity requirements 
for a multi-family zoning district otherwise required by these Guidelines.   
 
cd. 
Methodology for determining a multi-family zoning district’s multi-family unit capacity 
 
MBTA communities seeking a determination of compliance must use the DHCDEOHLC 
compliance model to provide an estimate of the number of multi-family housing units that can be 
developed as of right within the multi-family zoning district.  The multi-family unit capacity of an 
existing or proposed district shall be calculated using the unit capacity  worksheet described in 
Appendix 2.   This worksheet produces an estimate of a district’s multi-family unit capacity using inputs 
such as the amount of developable land in the district, the dimensional requirements applicable to lots 
and buildings (including, for example, height limitations, lot coverage limitations, and maximum floor 
area ratio), and the parking space requirements applicable to multi-family uses.   
 
Minimum unit capacity is a measure of whether a multi-family zoning district is of a reasonable 
size, not a requirement to produce housing units.  Nothing in Section 3A or these guidelines should be 
interpreted as a mandate to construct a specified number of housing units, nor as a housing production 
target.  Demonstrating compliance with the minimum multi-family unit capacity requires only that an 
MBTA community show that the zoning allows multi-family housing as of right and that a sufficient 
number of multi-family housing units could be added to or replace existing uses and structures over 
time—even though such additions or replacements may be unlikely to occur soon.   
 
If an MBTA community has two or more zoning districts in which multi-family housing is 
allowed as of right, then two or more districts may be considered cumulatively to meet the minimum 
land area and minimum multi-family unit capacity requirements, as long as each district independently 
complies with Section 3A’s other requirements. 
 
ed. 
Water and wastewater infrastructure within the multi-family zoning district 
 
MBTA communities are encouraged to consider the availability of water and wastewater 
infrastructure when selecting the location of a new multi-family zoning district.  But compliance with 
Section 3A does not require a municipality to install new water or wastewater infrastructure, or add to 
the capacity of existing infrastructure, to accommodate future multi-family housing production within 

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 
the multi-family zoning district.  In most cases, multi-family housing can be created using private septic 
and wastewater treatment systems that meet state environmental standards.  Where public systems 
currently exist, but capacity is limited, private developers may be able to support the cost of necessary 
water and sewer extensions.  While the zoning must allow for gross average density of at least 15 units 
per acre, there may be other legal or practical limitations, including lack of infrastructure or 
infrastructure capacity, that result in actual housing production at lower density than the zoning allows. 
 
The multi-family unit capacity analysis does not need to take into consideration limitations on 
development resulting from existing water or wastewater infrastructure within the multi-family zoning 
district, or, in areas not served by public sewer, any applicable limitations under title 5 of the state 
environmental code.  For purposes of the unit capacity analysis, it is assumed that housing developers 
will design projects that work within existing water and wastewater constraints, and that developers, the 
municipality, or the Commonwealth will provide funding for infrastructure upgrades as needed for 
individual projects.  
 
6. 
Minimum Gross Density 
 
Section 3A expressly requires that a multi-family zoning district—not just the individual lots of 
land within the district—must have a minimum gross density of 15 units per acre, subject to any further 
limitations imposed by section 40 of chapter 131 and title 5 of the state environmental code established 
pursuant to section 13 of chapter 21A.  The Zoning Act defines “gross density” as “a units-per-acre 
density measurement that includes land occupied by public rights-of-way and any recreational, civic, 
commercial and other nonresidential uses.” 
 
a. 
District-wide gross density 
 
To meet the district-wide gross density requirement, the dimensional restrictions and parking 
requirements for the multi-family zoning district must allow for a gross density of 15 units per acre of 
land within the district.  By way of example, to meet that requirement for a 40-acre multi-family zoning 
district, the zoning must allow for at least 15 multi-family units per acre, or a total of at least 600 multi-
family units.   
 
For purposes of determining compliance with Section 3A’s gross density requirement, the 
DHCDEOHLC compliance model will not count in the denominator any excluded land located within 
the multi-family zoning district, except public rights-of-way, private rights-of-way, and publicly-owned 
land used for recreational, civic, commercial, and other nonresidential uses.  This method of calculating 
minimum gross density respects the Zoning Act’s definition of gross density—“a units-per-acre density 
measurement that includes land occupied by public rights-of-way and any recreational, civic, 
commercial and other nonresidential uses”—while making it unnecessary to draw patchwork multi-
family zoning districts that carve out wetlands and other types of excluded land that are not developed or 
developable. 
 
b. 
Achieving district-wide gross density by sub-districts 
 
Zoning ordinances and by-laws typically limit the unit density on individual lots.  To comply 
with Section 3A’s gross density requirement, an MBTA community may establish reasonable sub-

===== PAGE 13 =====
13 
districts within a multi-family zoning district, with different density limits for each sub-district, provided 
that the gross density for the district as a whole meets the statutory requirement of not less than 15 
multi-family units per acre.  DHCDEOHLC will review sub-districts to ensure that the density allowed 
as of right in each sub-district is reasonable and not intended to frustrate the purpose of Section 3A by 
allowing projects of a such high density that they are not likely to be constructed. 
 
 
c. 
Wetland and septic considerations relating to density 
 
Section 3A provides that a district of reasonable size shall have a minimum gross density of 15 
units per acre, “subject to any further limitations imposed by section 40 of chapter 131 and title 5 of the 
state environmental code established pursuant to section 13 of chapter 21A.”  This directive means that 
even though the zoning district must permit 15 units per acre as of right, any multi-family housing 
produced within the district is subject to, and must comply with, the state wetlands protection act and 
title 5 of the state environmental code—even if such compliance means a proposed project will be less 
dense than 15 units per acre. 
 
7. 
Determining Suitability for Families with Children 
 
Section 3A states that a compliant multi-family zoning district must allow multi-family housing 
as of right, and that “such multi-family housing shall be without age restrictions and shall be suitable for 
families with children.”  DHCDEOHLC will deem a multi-family zoning district to comply with these 
requirements as long as the zoning does not require multi-family uses to include units with age 
restrictions, and does not limit or restrict the size of the units, cap the number of bedrooms, the size of 
bedrooms, or the number of occupants, or impose a minimum age of occupants.  Limits, if any, on the 
size of units or number of bedrooms established by state law or regulation are not relevant to Section 3A 
or to determinations of compliance made pursuant to these guidelines. 
 
8. 
Location of Districts 
 
a. General rule for determining the applicability of Section 3A’s location requirement  
 
Section 3A states that a compliant multi-family zoning district shall “be located not more than 
0.5 miles from a commuter rail station, subway station, ferry terminal or bus station, if applicable.”  
When an MBTA community has only a small amount of transit station area within its boundaries, it may 
not be possible or practical to locate all of the multi-family zoning district within 0.5 miles of a transit 
station.  Transit station area may not be a practical location for a multi-family zoning district if it does 
not include developable land where multi-family housing can actually be constructed.  Therefore, for 
purposes of determining compliance with Section 3A, DHCDEOHLC will consider the statute’s location 
requirement to be “applicable” to a particular MBTA community only if that community has within its 
borders at least 100 acres of developable station area.  DHCDEOHLC will require more or less of the 
multi-family zoning district to be located within transit station areas depending on how much total 
developable station area is in that community, as shown on Table 2: 
 
 

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 
 
Table 2. 
Total developable station area within  
the MBTA community (acres) 
 
Portion of the multi-family zoning district  
that must be within a transit station area 
0-100 
0% 
101-250 
20% 
251-400 
40% 
401-600 
50% 
601-800 
75% 
801+ 
90% 
 
 
The percentages specified in this table apply to both the minimum land area and the minimum 
multi-family unit capacity.  For example, in an MBTA community that has a total of 500 acres of transit 
station area within its boundaries, a multi-family zoning district will comply with Section 3A’s location 
requirement if at least 50 percent of the district’s minimum land area is located within the transit station 
area, and at least 50 percent of the district’s minimum multi-family unit capacity is located within the 
transit station area. 
 
A community with transit station areas associated with more than one transit station may locate 
the multi-family zoning district in any of the transit station areas.  For example, a rapid transit 
community with transit station area around a subway station in one part of town, and transit station area 
around a commuter rail station in another part of town, may locate its multi-family zoning district in 
either or both transit station areas. 
 
b. MBTA communities with limited or no transit station area 
 
When an MBTA community has less than 100 acres of developable station area within its 
boundaries, the MBTA community may locate the multi-family zoning district anywhere within its 
boundaries.  To encourage transit-oriented multi-family housing consistent with the general intent of 
Section 3A, MBTA communities are encouraged to consider locating the multi-family zoning district in 
an area with reasonable access to a transit station based on existing street patterns, pedestrian 
connections, and bicycle lanes, or in an area that qualifies as an “eligible location” as defined in Chapter 
40A—for example, near an existing downtown or village center, near a regional transit authority bus 
stop or line, or in a location with existing under-utilized facilities that can be redeveloped into new 
multi-family housing.   
 
c. General guidance on district location applicable to all MBTA communities 
 
When choosing the location of a new multi-family zoning district, every MBTA community 
should consider how much of a proposed district is sensitive land on which permitting requirements and 
other considerations could make it challenging or inadvisable to construct multi-family housing.  For 
example, an MBTA community may want to avoid including in a multi-family zoning district areas that 
are subject to flooding, or are known habitat for rare or threatened species, or have prime agricultural 
soils in active agricultural use.   
 
 

===== PAGE 15 =====
15 
 
9. 
Determinations of Compliance 
 
 
Section 3A provides that any MBTA community that fails to comply with Section 3A’s 
requirements will be ineligible for funding from any of the listed funding sources.  DHCDEOHLC will 
make determinations of compliance with Section 3A in accordance with these guidelines to inform state 
agency decisions on which MBTA communities are eligible to receive funding from the listed funding 
sources.  Determinations of compliance also may inform funding decisions by EOHED, DHCD, the 
MBTA and other state agencies which consider local housing policies when evaluating applications for 
discretionary grant programs, or making other discretionary funding decisions.   The following 
discretionary grant programs will take compliance with Section 3A into consideration when making 
grant award recommendations:   
 
i. 
Community Planning Grants, EOHLC,  
ii. 
Massachusetts Downtown Initiative, EOED,  
iii. 
Urban Agenda, EOED,  
iv. 
Rural and Small Town Development Fund, EOED,  
v. 
Brownfields Redevelopment Fund, MassDevelopment,  
vi. 
Site Readiness Program, MassDevelopment,  
vii. 
Underutilized Properties Program, MassDevelopment,  
viii. 
Collaborative Workspace Program, MassDevelopment,  
ix. 
Real Estate Services Technical Assistance, MassDevelopment,  
x. 
Commonwealth Places Programs, MassDevelopment,  
xi. 
Land Use Planning Grants, EOEEA,  
xii. 
Local Acquisitions for Natural Diversity (LAND) Grants, EOEEA, and  
xiii. 
Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness (MVP) Planning and Project Grants, EOEEA 
 
Determinations of compliance also may inform other funding decisions by EOED, EOHLC, the MBTA 
and other state agencies which consider local housing policies when evaluating applications for 
discretionary grant programs or making other discretionary funding decisions.    
 
 
DHCDEOHLC interprets Section 3A as allowing every MBTA community a reasonable 
opportunity to enact zoning amendments as needed to come into compliance. Accordingly, 
DHCDEOHLC will recognize both interim compliance, which means an MBTA community is taking 
active steps to enact a multi-family zoning district that complies with Section 3A, and district 
compliance, which is achieved when DHCDEOHLC determines that an MBTA community has a multi-
family zoning district that complies with Section 3A.  The requirements for interim and district 
compliance are described in more detail below.    
 
Table 3. 
Transit Category (# of 
municipalities) 
Deadline to Submit 
Action Plan  
 
Deadline to Submit  
District Compliance Application 
Rapid transit community (12) 
January 31, 2023 
December 31, 2023 
Commuter rail community (71) 
January 31, 2023 
December 31, 2024 

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 
Transit Category (# of 
municipalities) 
Deadline to Submit 
Action Plan  
 
Deadline to Submit  
District Compliance Application 
Adjacent community (58) 
January 31, 2023 
December 31, 2024 
Adjacent small town (34) 
January 31, 2023 
December 31, 2025 
 
a. 
Process to achieve interim compliance 
 
Many MBTA communities do not currently have a multi-family zoning district of reasonable 
size that complies with the requirements of Section 3A.  Prior to achieving district compliance (but no 
later than the deadlines set forth in Table 3), these MBTA communities can achieve interim compliance 
by taking the following affirmative steps towards the creation of a compliant multi-family zoning 
district.     
 
i. 
Creation and submission of an action plan.  An MBTA community seeking to achieve 
interim compliance must first submit an action plan on a form to be provided by 
DHCDEOHLC.  An MBTA community action plan must provide information about 
current zoning, past planning for multi-family housing, if any, and potential locations for 
a multi-family zoning district.  The action plan also will require the MBTA community to 
establish a timeline for various actions needed to create a compliant multi-family zoning 
district.    
 
ii. 
DHCDEOHLC approval of an action plan.  DHCDEOHLC will review each submitted 
action plan for consistency with these guidelines, including but not limited to the 
timelines in Table 3.  If DHCDEOHLC determines that the MBTA community’s action 
plan is reasonable and will lead to district compliance in a timely manner, DHCDEOHLC 
will issue a determination of interim compliance.  DHCDEOHLC may require 
modifications to a proposed action plan prior to approval.   
 
iii. 
Implementation of the action plan.  After DHCDEOHLC approves an action plan and 
issues a determination of interim compliance, an MBTA community must diligently 
implement the action plan.  DHCDEOHLC may revoke a determination of interim 
compliance if an MBTA community has not made sufficient progress in implementing an 
approved action plan.  DHCDEOHLC and EOHED EOED will review an MBTA 
community’s progress in implementing its action plan prior to making an award of funds 
under the Housing Choice Initiative and Massworks infrastructure program.   
 
iv. 
Deadlines for submitting action plans.  To achieve interim compliance for grants made 
through the 2023 One Stop Application, action plans must be submitted by no later than 
January 31, 2023.  An MBTA community that does not submit an action plan by that date 
may not receive a DHCDEOHLC determination of interim compliance in time to receive 
an award of funds from the listed funding sources in 2023.  An MBTA community that 
does not achieve interim compliance in time for the 2023 One Stop Application may 
submit an action plan to become eligible for a subsequent round of the One Stop 
Application, provided that an action plan must be submitted by no later than January 31 
of the year in which the MBTA community seeks to establish grant eligibility; and 

===== PAGE 17 =====
17 
provided further that no action plan may be submitted or approved after the applicable 
district compliance application deadline set forth in Table 3.   
  
b. 
Assistance for communities implementing an action plan.   
 
MBTA communities are encouraged to communicate as needed with DHCDEOHLC staff 
throughout the process of implementing an action plan, and may .  DHCDEOHLC will endeavor to 
respond to inquiries inquire about whether a proposed multi-family zoning district complies with 
Section 3A prior to a vote by the municipal legislative body to create or modify such a district.  Such 
requests shall be made on a form to be provided by DHCDEOHLC. If a request is and should shallbe 
submitted at least 90 days prior to the vote of the legislative body, EOHLC shall respond prior to the 
vote.   
 
c. Requests for determination of district compliance 
 
When an MBTA community believes it has a multi-family zoning district that complies with 
Section 3A, it may request a determination of district compliance from DHCDEOHLC.  Such a request 
may be made for a multi-family zoning district that was in existence on the date that Section 3A became 
law, or for a multi-family zoning district that was created or amended after the enactment of Section 3A.  
In either case, such request shall be made on an application form required by DHCDEOHLC and shall 
include, at a minimum, the following information.  Municipalities will need to submit:  
 
(i) 
A certified copy of the municipal zoning ordinance or by-law and zoning map, including 
all provisions that relate to uses and structures in the multi-family zoning district. 
(ii) 
An estimate of multi-family unit capacity using the compliance model. 
(iii) 
GIS shapefile for the multi-family zoning district. 
(iv) 
In the case of a by-law enacted by a town, evidence that the clerk has submitted a copy of 
the adopted multi-family zoning district to the office of the Attorney General for approval 
as required by state law, or evidence of the Attorney General’s approval. 
 
After receipt of a request for determination of district compliance, DHCDEOHLC will notify the 
requesting MBTA community within 30 days if additional information is required to process the request.  
Upon reviewing a complete application, DHCDEOHLC will provide the MBTA community a written 
determination either stating that the existing multi-family zoning district complies with Section 3A, or 
identifying the reasons why the multi-family zoning district fails to comply with Section 3A and the 
steps that must be taken to achieve compliance.  An MBTA community that has achieved interim 
compliance prior to requesting a determination of district compliance shall remain in interim compliance 
for the period during which a request for determination of district compliance, with all required 
information, is pending at DHCDEOHLC. 
 
10. 
Ongoing Obligations; Rescission of a Determination of Compliance 
 
After receiving a determination of compliance, an MBTA community must notify 
DHCDEOHLC in writing of any zoning amendment or proposed zoning amendment that affects the 
compliant multi-family zoning district, or any other by-law, ordinance, rule or regulation that limits the 
development of multi-family housing in the multi-family zoning district.  DHCDEOHLC may rescind a 

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 
determination of district compliance, or require changes to a multi-family zoning district to remain in 
compliance, if DHCDEOHLC determines that:  
 
(i) 
The MBTA community submitted inaccurate information in its application for a 
determination of compliance; 
(ii) 
The MBTA community failed to notify DHCDEOHLC of a zoning amendment that 
affects the multi-family zoning district; 
(iii) 
The MBTA community enacts or amends any by-law or ordinance, or other rule or 
regulation, that materially alters the minimum land area and/or the multi-family unit 
capacity in the multi-family zoning district;  
(iv) 
A board, authority or official in the MBTA community does not issue permits, or 
otherwise acts or fails to act, to allow construction of a multi-family housing project that 
is allowed as of right in the multi-family zoning district (or any mixed-use zoning 
development district taken into account in determining the required multi-family unit 
capacity in the multi-family zoning district); 
(v) 
The MBTA community takes other action that causes the multi-family zoning district to 
no longer comply with Section 3A; or 
(vi) 
An MBTA community with an approved multi-family zoning district has changed transit 
category as a result of a newly opened or decommissioned transit station, or the 
establishment of permanent, regular service at a transit station where there was formerly 
intermittent or event-based service. 
 
11. 
Changes to MBTA Service 
 
Section 3A applies to the 175 177 MBTA communities identified in section 1A of the Zoning 
Act and section 1 of chapter 161A of the General Laws. When MBTA service changes, the list of 
MBTA communities and/or the transit category assignments of those MBTA communities in Appendix 
1 may change as well.  
 
The transit category assignments identified in Appendix 1 of these guidelines reflect certain 
MBTA service changes that will result from new infrastructure now under construction in connection 
with the South Coast Rail and Green Line Extension projects.  These service changes include the 
opening of new Green Line stations and commuter rail stations, as well as the elimination of regular 
commuter rail service at the Lakeville station.  These changes are scheduled to take effect in all cases a 
year or more before any municipal district compliance deadline.  Affected MBTA communities are 
noted in Appendix 1. 
 
Municipalities that are not now identified as MBTA communities and may be identified as such 
in the future are not addressed in these guidelines or included in Appendix 1.  New MBTA communities 
will be addressed with revisions to Appendix 1, and separate compliance timelines, in the future.  
 
Future changes to Silver Line routes or stations may change district location requirements when 
expanded high-capacity service combined with new facilities creates a bus station where there was not 
one before.  Changes to other bus routes, including the addition or elimination of bus stops or reductions 
or expansions of bus service levels, do not affect the transit categories assigned to MBTA communities 
and will not affect location requirements for multi-family zoning districts.  Any future changes to 

===== PAGE 19 =====
19 
MBTA transit service, transit routes and transit service levels are determined by the MBTA Board of 
Directors consistent with the MBTA’s Service Delivery Policy.   
 
List of Appendices: 
 
Appendix 1:  MBTA Community Categories and Requirements 
Appendix 2:  Compliance Methodology/Model 
