
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 13, 2023  11:40 AM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Littleton
1.2. Community Category
Commuter rail community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
750
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
Yes
1.5a. Please list MBTA commuter rail
stations that are located within the
municipal boundaries
Littleton/Route 495
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Maren Toohill
1.7a. Title
Town Planner
1.7b. Email Address
MToohill@littletonma.org

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.7c. Phone Number
(978) 540-2425
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Anthony Ansaldi
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
PO Box 1305
37 Shattuck Street
Littleton, MA 01460
  
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
AAnsaldi@littletonma.org
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Littleton Planning Board Chair Mark Montanari; Vice Chair Jeff Yates; Clerk
Bartlett Harvey; and members Delisa Laterzo and Anna Hueston are
working with consultants Emily Innes of Innes Associates and Eric
Halvorsen and Chris Herlich of RKG Associates and Town Planner Maren
Toohill.
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
Housing Goals are outlined in Littleton's 2017 Master Plan, 2019 Littleton
Common Revitalization Roadmap, and the 2020 Littleton Station Village
Vision Plan. Littleton seeks to encourage a variety of housing that meets
the needs of different age groups and is affordable to people of different
socio-economic backgrounds and to increase the diversity of Littleton's
housing stock. Infrastructure (Town Sewer) to support multifamily housing
is integral to achieving production of these units. Littleton adopted zoning
bylaws to support attached and detached accessory apartments on
owner-occupied residential lots; adopted a Senior Residential Development
Bylaw to provide for a variety of housing types, sizes, settings, residential
services, and price points to meet the needs of people as they are and
people with disabilities; adopted an Inclusionary Housing Zoning Bylaw with
a minimum 10% affordable unit requirement, and established the Littleton
Affordable Housing Trust and funded same with CPC funds and
Inclusionary Housing payments. Many of these steps are implementation
goals outlined in the Master Plan.
Littleton works to increase our stock of affordable housing units, utilizing
Local Action Units, and working with developers to meet these goals. 
The 2019 Littleton Common Revitalization Roadmap led to adoption of a
mixed-use Village Common Form Based Code zoning district in the
Littleton Common area, allowing the development of multi-family and
mixed-use buildings in and near Littleton Common. This led to adoption of
a separate and progressive King Street Common mixed-use zoning district
that allows multi-family and mixed-use development with up to 20
residential units per acre across the entire 42-acre district. This multifamily
density will support existing and new businesses in Littleton Common,
setting the table for a vibrant, walkable downtown with a range of housing
price points and types. 
Work on our next Housing Production Plan is slated for 2023/2024.
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
Proposed Zoning Bylaw to extend the King Street Common Zoning District
to allow additional multi-family units.
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
a. An existing zoning district or districts that might already comply with the
Section 3A Guidelines
d. A new base zoning district or districts
e. Other zoning strategy

===== PAGE 4 =====
3.1a. Please identify and briefly describe
the possibly-compliant district(s),
including any characteristics of existing
development or transit options that
make it suitable for use as this
community's 3A-compliant district.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents.
King Street Common district, combined with the proposed extension of the
current King Street Common district will allow for approximately 1,000
multifamily units in our downtown over the next few years. The Planning
Board approved 780-unit King Street Commons mixed-use development
attached. Please note Planning Board also approved a 285-unit
Residences at King Street Commons at the 410 Great Road site. 
Prior shuttle between Littleton Common and Commuter Rail was
suspended due to COVID; new more-robust service will be added to
provide service between the new multifamily units at King Street Common,
Littleton businesses, and the Littleton Commuter Rail station. New
sidewalks, bike lanes, multi-use paths are in planning stages, including
TIP-funded improvements near the station.
File
https://massgov.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14003579769
3.1d. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work this community
has already done for this district.
Several districts and options are under consideration:
(1) Expanding King Street Common district to include additional parcels,
including 410 Great Road. February 15, 2023 Special Town Meeting will
consider this proposal resulting in additional multifamily unit capacity in
Littleton Common.
(2) Add a multifamily district near the Littleton/Route 495 (Foster Street)
Commuter Rail station, focusing on "missing middle" housing options,
currently scheduled for May 2023 Town Meeting.
(3) A potential Commercial-Industrial redevelopment district on "upper"
Foster Street to allow multi-family or mixed-use redevelopment of obsolete
office buildings near the Littleton/Route 495 (Foster Street) Commuter Rail
Station.
File
https://massgov.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14003579771
3.1e. Please briefly explain the strategy.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents that show planning work
this community has already done for
this strategy.
Littleton will meet MBTA Community goals by focusing first on Littleton
Common - this work is currently underway, then turning quickly to a
separate new zoning district that allows multifamily units by right near the
commuter rail station and a possible office/industrial redevelopment area
for existing underutilized tired office buildings. Littleton Common would
include apartments, condos, and age-in-place residences at a larger scale
as shown on the approved King Street Commons development (attached
above) and the approved Residences at King Street Common attached
below. 
Missing middle housing is likely the focus of the new zoning district at the
commuter rail station. 
File
https://massgov.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14003579773

===== PAGE 5 =====
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
Town Sewer funding and redevelopment under the new Littleton Village
FBC and King Street Common zoning will address current groundwater
quality issues, support economic development and provide a walkable,
vibrant town center that can be connected by shuttle bus, sidewalks, and
bike lanes to the Littleton/495 Commuter Rail Station. Addressing
groundwater quality (funding Town Sewer), economic development,
creating a walkable vibrant Town Center, traffic calming/complete streets,
and connectivity to MBTA station all provide a more
environmentally-friendly approach to housing. Funding for traffic and
streetscape improvements to support this development is key.
Rezoning and redevelopment near the Littleton Commuter Rail Station will
follow, with the understanding that infrastructure to service a Foster Street
3A zoning district is limited - there is no public sewer. 
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Obtain Funding for 3A work
May 20, 2022
Sep 23, 2022
Short Answer
Select and Hire Consultant
Sep 24, 2022
Oct 31, 2022
Short Answer
Public Outreach throughout
Jan 01, 2022

===== PAGE 6 =====
Dec 31, 2024
Short Answer
Develop zoning
Feb 01, 2023
Oct 31, 2023
Short Answer
Apply DHCD Compliance Model
Mar 01, 2023
Oct 31, 2023
Short Answer
Hold PB Hearings
Apr 13, 2023
Oct 31, 2023
Short Answer
Town Meeting, Special Town Meeting
May 01, 2023
Nov 15, 2023
Short Answer
Submit District Compliance App
Jun 01, 2023
Dec 15, 2023
If there is any other feedback you would
like to share about the compliance
process, please use this space to
provide it. 
Littleton's King Street Common District - both currently, and the expansion
proposed exceed the 3A district unit requirements in Littleton Common.
The Planning Board is working quickly to also propose a new 3A district in
close proximity to the commuter rail station, however infrastructure service
to that area is problematic, with no municipal sewer. The timeline for 3A
compliance includes a Feb. 15, 2023 Special Town Meeting to expand the
King Street Common zoning district; a May 1, 2023 Town Meeting to add a
3A "missing middle" housing district - with a back-up of a Fall 2023 Town
Meeting if necessary. Timeline started immediately upon receipt of initial
MBTA Communities guidance in December 2021 and will continue until
Littleton's District Compliance Application is approved. Funding for Town
Sewer and for traffic/streetscape improvements on State Highways in
Littleton Common are key.
