
===== PAGE 1 =====
Proposed Multifamily Zoning Article  
 
 
1
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaw as follows: 
 
I. 
by amending Section 2.0, Districts, by: 
 
a. 
adding to Section 2.2, Special Districts, the following new district after Planned Village 
Development District: 
 
 
Multifamily Overlay District  
MFOD 
 
and 
 
b. 
adding to Section 2.3, Location of Districts, the following new sentence:  
 
With respect to the location and bounds of the Multifamily Overlay District, see  
§ 9.6 of the bylaw. 
 
II. 
by amending Section 9.0, Special Districts, by adding the following new provision, 
 
Section 9.6, Multifamily Overlay District: 
 
9.6 
Multifamily Overlay District 
The purpose of the Multifamily Overlay District (MFOD) is to provide for as-of-right 
multifamily housing development under G.L. c. 40A, § 3A, and the Section 3A Compliance 
Guidelines of the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC), as may be 
amended from time to time.  Section 3A requires Lynnfield to establish “at least 1 district of 
reasonable size in which multi-family housing is permitted as of right.”  Lynnfield must permit 
the development of housing suitable for families with children, and may not impose age 
restrictions, within the district. 
 
9.6.1 
Applicability.  
1. 
The MFOD shall be as shown on the map entitled, Multifamily Overlay District, 
dated October 3, 2024 on file with the Town Clerk, which is hereby made part of 
the Town of Lynnfield Zoning Map. The MFOD includes the following 
subdistricts: 
Subdistrict 1 (PVDD) 
Subdistrict 2 (Broadway South) 
Subdistrict 3 (Broadway North) 
 
2. 
At the option of the Applicant, development of land within the MFOD may be 
undertaken subject to the requirements of this Section 9.6 or by complying with 
all applicable requirements of the underlying district. Developments proceeding 
under this Section 9.6 shall be governed solely by the provisions herein and the 
standards or procedures of the underlying districts shall not apply. Where the 
MFOD authorizes uses and dimensional controls not otherwise allowed in the 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Proposed Multifamily Zoning Article  
 
 
2
underlying district or any applicable overlay district, the provisions of the MFOD 
shall control. Uses and dimensional controls of the MFOD are not subject to any 
special permit requirements of the underlying district or applicable overlay 
districts.  
9.6.2 
Definitions. As used in this Section 9.6, the following definitions shall apply. To the 
extent that there is any conflict between the definitions set forth herein or Section 11.0, 
this Section 9.6 shall control. 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION – shall have the meaning provided in 
Section 9.5.4. 
 
AFFORDABLE UNIT – shall have the meaning provided in Section 9.5.4. 
 
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING - A dwelling with three or more units, or two or more 
buildings on the same lot, each having two or more units.1  
 
 
9.6.3 
Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the MFOD. 
1. 
Multifamily housing 
2. 
Accessory residential uses serving residents of the multifamily housing, 
including: 
a. 
Outdoor recreation uses, such as but not limited to a swimming pool, tennis 
court, or other game court 
b. 
Off-street parking, including surface parking and parking structures 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Proposed Multifamily Zoning Article  
 
 
3
 
9.6.4 
Density and Dimensional Regulations. Development in the MFOD shall comply with 
the following density and dimensional requirements and shall not be subject to Section 
4.0 of this bylaw. 
Standard 
PVDD 
Broadway South 
Broadway North 
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) 
80,000 
50,000 
30,000 
Maximum lot coverage 
35% 
20% 
20% 
Maximum building height 
 
 
 
     Stories (maximum) 
4 
3.5 
2.5 
     Feet (maximum) (lin. feet) 
50 
40 
35 
Minimum frontage (lin. feet) 
0 
120 
120 
Minimum required setbacks: (lin. feet) 
 
 
 
     Front  
30 
40 
40 
     Side 
30 
30 
30 
     Rear 
20 
20 
20 
Maximum units per acre 
16 
18 
16 
 
1. 
Exceptions.  
a. 
Vertical projections or roof structures that house elevators, stairways, tanks, 
ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the 
building, or to fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, 
chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, wireless, radio or television masts, 
silos, energy generation and conservation apparatus, or similar unoccupied 
features, may be erected above the height limits in this Section 9.6 provided 
the structures are in no way used for living purposes and do not constitute 
more than 25 percent of the ground floor area of the building. 
b. 
The Board of Appeals may waive the minimum side setback for a 
development in which multifamily dwellings are divided by a zero lot line.  
2. 
More than one residential or accessory building or structure shall be allowed on a 
lot. The minimum separation between buildings on a lot shall comply with the 
State Building Code and Massachusetts Fire Code.   
 
9.6.5 
Affordable Housing. Any multifamily development in the MFOD shall provide 
affordable units in accordance with the following. 
1. 
In any multi-family development resulting in a net increase of 10 or more 
dwelling units on any parcel or contiguous parcels comprising a proposed 
development site, at least 10 percent of the dwelling units shall be affordable 
units. Fractions shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 
2. 
Developments shall not be segmented to avoid compliance with this Section 9.6. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Proposed Multifamily Zoning Article  
 
 
4
Segmentation shall mean one or more divisions of land that cumulatively result in 
a net increase of ten or more lots or dwelling units above the number existing 36 
months earlier on any parcel or set of contiguous parcels held in common 
ownership on or after the effective date of this Section 9.6. 
3. 
All the affordable units required in a proposed development shall be located 
within the development site and shall be comparable to the market-rate units.   
4. 
Design. Affordable units must be dispersed throughout a development and be 
comparable in construction quality and exterior design to the market-rate units. 
The affordable units shall have the same access to all on-site amenities and open 
space as the market-rate units. 
5. 
Timing. All affordable units must be constructed and occupied concurrently with 
or prior to the construction and occupancy of market-rate units or development.  
6. 
The unit mix (i.e. the number of bedrooms per unit) of the affordable units shall 
be in the same proportion as the unit mix of the market-rate units.  
7. 
All affordable units created under this Section 9.6 shall be subject to an affordable 
housing restriction approved by the Planning Board, Town Counsel, and the 
Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC). The restriction 
shall run with the land in perpetuity under G.L. c. 184, §§ 31-33 and shall be 
recorded with the Southern Essex County Registry of Deeds or Registry District 
of the Land Court prior to issuance of a building permit.  
9.6.6 
Development Standards 
1. 
No special permit shall be required for development under the following 
provisions, where applicable. Any applicable standards and requirements shall be 
addressed in conditions under Site Plan Approval.   
a. 
Section 7.1, Earth Removal 
b. 
Section 9.1, Flood Hazard District 
c. 
Section 9.2, Wetland Buffer Zone District 
2. 
Off-Street Parking. Developments in the MFOD shall conform to the 
requirements in Section 6.3, Off-Street Parking. In addition, MFOD developments 
shall have a minimum of 1.5 vehicle parking spaces per unit.  
3. 
Lighting Standards. Developments in the MFOD shall conform to the 
requirements in Section 6.5, Outdoor Lighting. 
4. 
Section 6.6, Enclosures and Screening, shall apply to developments in the MFOD.  
9.6.7 
Procedures. No building permit for multifamily housing developed in accordance with 
this Section 9.6 shall be issued without a site plan approval from the Board of Appeals 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Proposed Multifamily Zoning Article  
 
 
5
under Section 10.6. 
1. 
The Board may impose reasonable conditions to ensure compliance with the 
requirements of Section 9.6 and other applicable sections of the Zoning Bylaw or 
to mitigate any extraordinary adverse impacts of the development on nearby 
properties, provided that the Board’s conditions do not unduly restrict 
opportunities for housing development by adding unreasonable costs or by 
unreasonably impairing the economic feasibility of a proposed development.  
2. 
A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner and to the Applicant, if other 
than the owner. A notice of the decision shall be sent to the parties in interest and 
to persons who requested a notice at the public hearing. 
3. 
Site Plan Approval shall remain valid and shall run with the land indefinitely 
provided that construction has commenced within three years after the Board 
issues the decision, excluding time required to adjudicate any appeal from the 
Board’s decision. The time for commencing construction shall also be extended if 
the Applicant is diligently pursuing other required permits for the development, or 
if there is good cause for the Applicant’s failure to commence construction, or as 
may be provided in an approval for a multi-phase development. 
4. 
The Board of Appeals may adopt administrative rules and regulations relative to 
site plan approval in the MFOD and file the rules with the Town Clerk. The 
Board’s rules and regulations may include filing fees and procedures for the 
Board to engage outside consultants under G.L. c. 44, § 53G. Submission 
requirements and procedures shall be in accordance with the Board’s rules and 
regulations.  
5. 
Modifications to Approved Site Plans 
a. 
Minor Change. After a site plan has been approved by the Board of Appeals, 
an Applicant may apply to make minor changes involving minor utility or 
building orientation adjustments, or minor adjustments to parking or other 
site details that do not affect the overall buildout of the site, or provision of 
open space or affordable housing. Minor changes must be submitted to the 
Board of Appeals in accordance with the Board’s rules and regulations and 
shall include redlined prints of the approved plan. The Board of Appeals may 
authorize the proposed changes at any regularly scheduled meeting without 
the need to hold a public hearing. The Board of Appeals shall issue a written 
decision to approve or deny the minor changes and provide a copy to the 
Applicant for filing with the Town Clerk. 
b. 
Major Change. Changes deemed by the Board of Appeals to constitute a 
major change in an approved development because of the nature of the 
change or because the change cannot be appropriately characterized as a 
minor change under Subsection a. above shall be processed by the Board of 
Appeals as a new site plan application for Site Plan Approval. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Proposed Multifamily Zoning Article  
 
 
6
and  
 
III. 
by amending the Zoning Map by:  
incorporating into it the map entitled, Multifamily Overlay District, dated October 3, 
2024, which is on file with the Town Clerk, which map shows the MFOD and includes 
the following subdistricts: 
Subdistrict 1 (PVDD) 
Subdistrict 2 (Broadway South) 
Subdistrict 3 (Broadway North) 
 
 
or to take any other action in connection therewith. 
 
 
 
c:\Lynnfield\3A Zoning Article 
