
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
Issue Date: August 10, 2022 
Revised:  October 21, 2022 
 
Compliance Guidelines for Multi-family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
 
 
1. 
Overview of Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
 
Section 3A of the Zoning Act provides:  An MBTA community shall have a zoning 
ordinance or by-law that provides for at least 1 district of reasonable size in which multi-family 
housing is permitted as of right; provided, however, that such multi-family housing shall be without 
age restrictions and shall be suitable for families with children. For the purposes of this section, a 
district of reasonable size shall: (i) have a minimum gross density of 15 units per acre, subject to 
any further limitations imposed by section 40 of chapter 131 and title 5 of the state environmental 
code established pursuant to section 13 of chapter 21A; and (ii) be located not more than 0.5 miles 
from a commuter rail station, subway station, ferry terminal or bus station, if applicable. 
 
The purpose of Section 3A is to encourage the production of multi-family housing by 
requiring MBTA communities to adopt zoning districts where multi-family housing is allowed as of 
right, and that meet other requirements set forth in the statute. 
 
The Department of Housing and Community Development, in consultation with the 
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority and the Massachusetts Department of Transportation, 
is required to promulgate guidelines to determine if an MBTA community is in compliance with 
Section 3A.  DHCD promulgated preliminary guidance on January 29, 2021.  DHCD updated that 
preliminary guidance on December 15, 2021, and on that same date issued draft guidelines for 
public comment.  These final guidelines supersede all prior guidance and set forth how MBTA 
communities may achieve compliance with Section 3A. 
 
2. 
Definitions 
 
“Adjacent community” means an MBTA community that (i) has within its boundaries less 
than 100 acres of developable station area, and (ii) is not an adjacent small town. 
 
“Adjacent small town” means an MBTA community that (i) has within its boundaries less 
than 100 acres of developable station area, and (ii) either has a population density of less than 500 
persons per square mile, or a population of not more than 7,000 year-round residents as determined 
in the most recently published United States Decennial Census of Population and Housing. 
 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING & 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
Charles D. Baker, Governor      Karyn E. Polito, Lt. Governor      Jennifer D. Maddox, Undersecretary 
 
100 Cambridge Street, Suite 300 
  
 
www.mass.gov/dhcd 
Boston, Massachusetts  02114 
 
617.573.1100  

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
2 
“Affordable unit” means a multi-family housing unit that is subject to a restriction in its 
chain of title limiting the sale price or rent, or limiting occupancy to an individual or household of a 
specified income, or both.  Affordable units may be, but are not required to be, eligible for inclusion 
on DHCD’s Subsidized Housing Inventory.  Nothing in these Guidelines changes the Subsidized 
Housing Inventory eligibility criteria, and no affordable unit shall be counted on the Subsidized 
Housing Inventory unless it satisfies the requirements for inclusion under 760 CMR 56.03(2) or any 
other regulation or guidance issued by DHCD. 
 
“Age-restricted housing” means any housing unit encumbered by a title restriction requiring 
a minimum age for some or all occupants. 
 
“As of right” means development that may proceed under a zoning ordinance or by-law 
without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary 
zoning approval. 
 
“Bus station” means a location with a passenger platform and other fixed infrastructure 
serving as a point of embarkation for the MBTA Silver Line. Upon the request of an MBTA 
community, DHCD, in consultation with the MBTA, may determine that other locations qualify as a 
bus station if (i) such location has a sheltered platform or other fixed infrastructure serving a point 
of embarkation for a high-capacity MBTA bus line, and (ii) the area around such fixed 
infrastructure is highly suitable for multi-family housing. 
 
“Commuter rail community” means an MBTA community that (i) does not meet the criteria 
for a rapid transit community, and (ii) has within its borders at least 100 acres of developable station 
area associated with one or more commuter rail stations.   
 
“Commuter rail station” means any MBTA commuter rail station with year-round, rather 
than intermittent, seasonal, or event-based, service, including stations under construction and 
scheduled to being service before the end of 2023, but not including existing stations at which 
service will be terminated, or reduced below regular year-round service, before the end of 2023. 
 
“Compliance model” means the model created by DHCD to determine compliance with 
Section 3A’s reasonable size, gross density, and location requirements.  The compliance model is 
described in further detail in Appendix 2. 
 
“Determination of compliance” means a determination made by DHCD as to whether an 
MBTA community has a multi-family zoning district that complies with the requirements of Section 
3A.  A determination of compliance may be determination of interim compliance or a determination 
of district compliance, as described in section 9. 
 
“Developable land” means land on which multi-family housing can be permitted and 
constructed.  For purposes of these guidelines, developable land consists of: (i) all privately-owned 
land except lots or portions of lots that meet the definition of excluded land, and (ii) developable 
public land. 
 
“Developable public land” means any publicly-owned land that (i) is used by a local housing 
authority; (ii) has been identified as a site for housing development in a housing production plan 
approved by DHCD; or (iii) has been designated by the public owner for disposition and 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
3 
redevelopment. Other publicly-owned land may qualify as developable public land if DHCD 
determines, at the request of an MBTA community and after consultation with the public owner, 
that such land is the location of obsolete structures or uses, or otherwise is suitable for conversion to 
multi-family housing, and will be converted to or made available for multi-family housing within a 
reasonable period of time. 
 
 
“Developable station area” means developable land that is within 0.5 miles of a transit 
station. 
 
“DHCD” means the Department of Housing and Community Development. 
 
“EOHED” means the Executive Office of Housing and Economic Development. 
 
“Excluded land” means land areas on which it is not possible or practical to construct multi-
family housing.  For purposes of these guidelines, excluded land is defined by reference to the 
ownership, use codes, use restrictions, and hydrological characteristics in MassGIS and consists of 
the following: 
 
(i) 
All publicly-owned land, except for lots or portions of lots determined to be 
developable public land. 
(ii) 
All rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and other surface waterbodies. 
(iii) 
All wetland resource areas, together with a buffer zone around wetlands and 
waterbodies equivalent to the minimum setback required by title 5 of the state 
environmental code. 
(iv) 
Protected open space and recreational land that is legally protected in perpetuity (for 
example, land owned by a local land trust or subject to a conservation restriction), or 
that is likely to remain undeveloped due to functional or traditional use (for example, 
cemeteries). 
(v) 
All public rights-of-way and private rights-of-way. 
(vi) 
Privately-owned land on which development is prohibited to protect private or public 
water supplies, including, but not limited to, Zone I wellhead protection areas and 
Zone A surface water supply protection areas. 
(vii) 
Privately-owned land used for educational or institutional uses such as a hospital, 
prison, electric, water, wastewater or other utility, museum, or private school, college 
or university. 
 
“Ferry terminal” means the location where passengers embark and disembark from regular, 
year-round MBTA ferry service.   
 
“Gross density” means a units-per-acre density measurement that includes land occupied by 
public rights-of-way and any recreational, civic, commercial, and other nonresidential uses. 
 
“Housing suitable for families” means housing comprised of residential dwelling units that 
are not age-restricted housing, and for which there are no zoning restriction on the number of 
bedrooms, the size of bedrooms, or the number of occupants. 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
4 
“Listed funding sources” means (i) the Housing Choice Initiative as described by the 
governor in a message to the general court dated December 11, 2017; (ii) the Local Capital Projects 
Fund established in section 2EEEE of chapter 29; and (iii) the MassWorks infrastructure program 
established in section 63 of chapter 23A.   
 
“Lot” means an area of land with definite boundaries that is used or available for use as the 
site of a building or buildings.   
 
“MassGIS data” means the comprehensive, statewide database of geospatial information and 
mapping functions maintained by the Commonwealth's Bureau of Geographic Information, within 
the Executive Office of Technology Services and Security, including the lot boundaries and use 
codes provided by municipalities. 
 
“MBTA” means the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
  
“MBTA community” means a city or town that is: (i) one of the 51 cities and towns as 
defined in section 1 of chapter 161A; (ii) one of the 14 cities and towns as defined in said section 1 
of said chapter 161A; (iii) other served communities as defined in said section 1 of said chapter 
161A; or (iv) a municipality that has been added to the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority 
under section 6 of chapter 161A or in accordance with any special law relative to the area 
constituting the authority. 
 
“Multi-family housing” means a building with 3 or more residential dwelling units or 2 or 
more buildings on the same lot with more than 1 residential dwelling unit in each building. 
 
“Multi-family unit capacity” means an estimate of the total number of multi-family housing 
units that can be developed as of right within a multi-family zoning district, made in accordance 
with the requirements of section 5.b below. 
 
“Multi-family zoning district” means a zoning district, including a base district or an overlay 
district, in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right; provided that the district shall be in a 
fixed location or locations, and shown on a map that is part of the zoning ordinance or by-law. 
 
 
“One Stop Application” means the single application portal for the Community One Stop for 
Growth through which (i) the Executive Office of Housing and Economic Development considers 
requests for funding from the MassWorks infrastructure program; (ii) DHCD considers requests for 
funding from the Housing Choice Initiative, (iii) EOHED, DHCD and other state agencies consider 
requests for funding from other discretionary grant programs. 
 
 
“Private rights-of-way” means land area within which private streets, roads and other ways 
have been laid out and maintained, to the extent such land areas can be reasonably identified by 
examination of available tax parcel data.   
 
 
“Publicly-owned land” means (i) any land owned by the United States or a federal agency or 
authority; (ii) any land owned by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or a state agency or 
authority; and (iii) any land owned by a municipality or municipal board or authority. 
 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
5 
 
“Public rights-of-way” means land area within which public streets, roads and other ways 
have been laid out and maintained, to the extent such land areas can be reasonably identified by 
examination of available tax parcel data.   
 
 
“Rapid transit community” means an MBTA community that has within its borders at least 
100 acres of developable station area associated with one or more subway stations, or MBTA Silver 
Line bus rapid transit stations. 
 
“Residential dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living 
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, 
cooking and sanitation. 
 
“Section 3A” means section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
 
“Sensitive land” means developable land that, due to its soils, slope, hydrology, or other 
physical characteristics, has significant conservation values that could be impaired, or 
vulnerabilities that could be exacerbated, by the development of multi-family housing.  It also 
includes locations where multi-family housing would be at increased risk of damage caused by 
flooding.  Sensitive land includes, but is not limited to, wetland buffer zones extending beyond the 
title 5 setback area; land subject to flooding that is not a wetland resource area; priority habitat for 
rare or threatened species; DEP-approved wellhead protection areas in which development may be 
restricted, but is not prohibited (Zone II and interim wellhead protection areas); and land areas with 
prime agricultural soils that are in active agricultural use.  
 
“Site plan review” means a process established by local ordinance or by-law by which a 
local board reviews, and potentially imposes conditions on, the appearance and layout of a specific 
project prior to the issuance of a building permit.   
 
“Subway station” means any of the stops along the MBTA Red Line, Green Line, Orange 
Line, or Blue Line, including any extensions to such lines now under construction and scheduled to 
begin service before the end of 2023. 
 
“Transit station” means an MBTA subway station, commuter rail station, ferry terminal or 
bus station.  
 
“Transit station area” means the land area within 0.5 miles of a transit station. 
 
“Zoning Act” means chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws. 
 
3. 
General Principles of Compliance 
 
These compliance guidelines describe how an MBTA community can comply with the 
requirements of Section 3A.  The guidelines specifically address: 
 
• What it means to allow multi-family housing “as of right.” 
 
• The metrics that determine if a multi-family zoning district is “of reasonable size.” 
 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
6 
• How to determine if a multi-family zoning district has a minimum gross density of 15 
units per acre, subject to any further limitations imposed by section 40 of chapter 
131 and title 5 of the state environmental code. 
• The meaning of Section 3A’s mandate that “such multi-family housing shall be without 
age restrictions and shall be suitable for families with children.” 
 
• The extent to which MBTA communities have flexibility to choose the location of a 
multi-family zoning district. 
 
The following general principles have informed the more specific compliance criteria that 
follow: 
 
• MBTA communities with subway stations, commuter rail stations and other transit 
stations benefit from having these assets located within their boundaries and should 
provide opportunity for multi-family housing development around these assets.  MBTA 
communities with no transit stations within their boundaries benefit from proximity to 
transit stations in nearby communities.  
 
• The multi-family zoning districts required by Section 3A should encourage the 
development of multi-family housing projects of a scale, density and aesthetic that are 
compatible with existing surrounding uses, and minimize impacts to sensitive land.   
 
• “Reasonable size” is a relative rather than an absolute determination.  Because of the 
diversity of MBTA communities, a multi-family zoning district that is “reasonable” in 
one city or town may not be reasonable in another city or town.   
 
• When possible, multi-family zoning districts should be in areas that have safe, 
accessible, and convenient access to transit stations for pedestrians and bicyclists.  
 
4. 
Allowing Multi-Family Housing “As of Right”  
 
 
To comply with Section 3A, a multi-family zoning district must allow multi-family housing 
“as of right,” meaning that the construction and occupancy of multi-family housing is allowed in 
that district without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other 
discretionary approval.  DHCD will determine whether zoning provisions allow for multi-family 
housing as of right consistent with the following guidelines. 
 
 
a. 
Site plan review 
 
The Zoning Act does not establish nor recognize site plan review as an independent method 
of regulating land use. However, the Massachusetts courts have recognized site plan review as a 
permissible regulatory tool, including for uses that are permitted as of right.  The court decisions 
establish that when site plan review is required for a use permitted as of right, site plan review 
involves the regulation of a use and not its outright prohibition.  The scope of review is therefore 
limited to imposing reasonable terms and conditions on the proposed use, consistent with applicable 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
7 
case law.1  These guidelines similarly recognize that site plan review may be required for multi-
family housing projects that are allowed as of right, within the parameters established by the 
applicable case law.  Site plan approval may regulate matters such as vehicular access and 
circulation on a site, architectural design of a building, and screening of adjacent properties.  Site 
plan review should not unreasonably delay a project nor impose conditions that make it infeasible or 
impractical to proceed with a project that is allowed as of right and complies with applicable 
dimensional regulations.   
 
b. 
Affordability requirements 
 
Section 3A does not include any express requirement or authorization for an MBTA 
community to require affordable units in a multi-family housing project that is allowed as of right.  
It is a common practice in many cities and towns to require affordable units in a multi-family 
project that requires a special permit, or as a condition for building at greater densities than the 
zoning otherwise would allow.  These inclusionary zoning requirements serve the policy goal of 
increasing affordable housing production.  If affordability requirements are excessive, however, 
they can make it economically infeasible to construct new multi-family housing. 
 
For purposes of making compliance determinations with Section 3A, DHCD will consider 
an affordability requirement to be consistent with as of right zoning as long as the zoning requires 
not more than 10 percent of the units in a project to be affordable units, and the cap on the income 
of families or individuals who are eligible to occupy the affordable units is not less than 80 percent 
of area median income.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, DHCD may, in its discretion, approve a 
greater percentage of affordable units, or deeper affordability for some or all of the affordable units, 
in either of the following circumstances: 
 
(i)  
The affordability requirements applicable in the multi-family zoning district are 
reviewed and approved by DHCD as part of a smart growth district under chapter 
40R, or under another zoning incentive program administered by DHCD; or 
 
(ii)   
The affordability requirements applicable in the multi-family zoning district are 
supported by an economic feasibility analysis, prepared for the municipality by a 
qualified and independent third party acceptable to DHCD, and using a methodology 
and format acceptable to DHCD.  The analysis must demonstrate that a reasonable 
variety of multi-family housing types can be feasibly developed at the proposed 
affordability levels, taking into account the densities allowed as of right in the 
district, the dimensional requirements applicable within the district, and the 
minimum number of parking spaces required. 
 
In no case will DHCD approve alternative affordability requirements that require more than 
20 percent of the units in a project to be affordable units, except in a smart growth zoning district 
under chapter 40R with a 25 percent affordability requirement approved and adopted prior to the 
 
1   See, e.g., Y.D. Dugout, Inc. v. Board of Appeals of Canton, 357 Mass. 25 (1970); Prudential Insurance Co. of 
America v. Board of Appeals of Westwood, 23 Mass. App. Ct. 278 (1986); Osberg v. Planning Bd. of Sturbridge, 44 
Mass. App. Ct. 56, 59 (1997) (Planning Board “may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the proposed use, but it 
does not have discretionary power to deny the use”). 

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
8 
issuance of these guidelines, including any such existing district that is expanded or amended to 
comply with these guidelines.  
 
c. 
Other requirements that do not apply uniformly in the multi-family zoning district 
 
Zoning will not be deemed compliant with Section 3A’s requirement that multi-family 
housing be allowed as of right if the zoning imposes requirements on multi-family housing that are 
not generally applicable to other uses.  The following are examples of requirements that would be 
deemed to be inconsistent with “as of right” use: (i) a requirement that multi-family housing meet 
higher energy efficiency standards than other uses; (ii) a requirement that a multi-family use 
achieve a third party certification that is not required for other uses in the district; and (iii) a 
requirement that multi-family use must be combined with commercial or other uses on the same lot 
or as part of a single project.  Mixed use projects may be allowed as of right in a multi-family 
zoning district, as long as multi-family housing is separately allowed as of right.   
 
5. 
Determining “Reasonable Size” 
 
 
In making determinations of “reasonable size,” DHCD will take into consideration both the 
land area of the multi-family zoning district, and the multi-family zoning district’s multi-family unit 
capacity.   
 
a. 
 Minimum land area 
 
A zoning district is a specifically delineated land area with uniform regulations and 
requirements governing the use of land and the placement, spacing, and size of buildings.  For 
purposes of compliance with Section 3A, a multi-family zoning district should be a neighborhood-
scale district, not a single development site on which the municipality is willing to permit a 
particular multi-family project.  DHCD will certify compliance with Section 3A only if an MBTA 
community’s multi-family zoning district meets the minimum land area applicable to that MBTA 
community, if any, as set forth in Appendix 1.  The minimum land area for each MBTA community 
has been determined as follows:  
 
(i) 
In rapid transit communities, commuter rail communities, and adjacent communities, 
the minimum land area of the multi-family zoning district is 50 acres, or 1.5% of the 
developable land in an MBTA community, whichever is less.  In certain cases, noted 
in Appendix 1, a smaller minimum land area applies. 
 
(ii) 
In adjacent small towns, there is no minimum land area.  In these communities, the 
multi-family zoning district may comprise as many or as few acres as the community 
determines is appropriate, as long as the district meets the applicable minimum 
multi-family unit capacity and the minimum gross density requirements. 
 
In all cases, at least half of the multi-family zoning district land areas must comprise 
contiguous lots of land.  No portion of the district that is less than 5 contiguous acres land will count 
toward the minimum size requirement.  If the multi-family unit capacity and gross density 
requirements can be achieved in a district of fewer than 5 acres, then the district must consist 
entirely of contiguous lots. 
 

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
9 
b. 
Minimum multi-family unit capacity 
 
A reasonably sized multi-family zoning district must also be able to accommodate a 
reasonable number of multi-family housing units as of right.  For purposes of determinations of 
compliance with Section 3A, DHCD will consider a reasonable multi-family unit capacity for each 
MBTA community to be a specified percentage of the total number of housing units within the 
community, with the applicable percentage based on the type of transit service in the community, as 
shown on Table 1:  
 
Table 1. 
Category 
Percentage of total housing units 
Rapid transit community 
25% 
Commuter rail community 
15% 
Adjacent community 
10% 
Adjacent small town 
5% 
 
To be deemed in compliance with Section 3A, each MBTA community must have a multi-
family zoning district with a multi-family unit capacity equal to or greater than the minimum unit 
capacity shown for it in Appendix 1.  The minimum multi-family unit capacity for each MBTA 
community has been determined as follows: 
 
(i) 
First, by multiplying the number of housing units in that community by 0.25, 0.15, 
0.10, or .05 depending on the MBTA community category.  For example, a rapid 
transit community with 7,500 housing units is required to have a multi-family zoning 
district with a multi-family unit capacity of 7,500 x 0.25 = 1,875 multi-family units.  
For purposes of these guidelines, the number of total housing units in each MBTA 
community has been established by reference to the most recently published United 
States Decennial Census of Population and Housing. 
 
(ii) 
Second, when there is a minimum land area applicable to an MBTA community, by 
multiplying that minimum land area (up to 50 acres) by Section 3A’s minimum gross 
density requirement of 15 units per acre.  The product of that multiplication creates a 
floor on multi-family unit capacity.  For example, an MBTA community with a 
minimum land area of 40 acres must have a district with a multi-family unit capacity 
of at least 600 (40 x 15) units.   
 
(iii) 
The minimum unit capacity applicable to each MBTA community is the greater of 
the numbers resulting from steps (i) and (ii) above, but subject to the following 
limitation:  In no case does the minimum multi-family unit capacity exceed 25% of 
the total housing units in that MBTA community.    
 
Example:  The minimum multi-family unit capacity for an adjacent community with 1,000 
housing units and a minimum land area of 50 acres is determined as follows:(i) first, by multiplying 
1,000 x .1 = 100 units; (ii) second, by multiplying 50 x 15 = 750 units;(iii) by taking the larger 
number, but adjusting that number down, if necessary, so that unit capacity is no more than 25% of 
1,000 = 250 units.  In this case, the adjustment in step (iii) results in a minimum unit capacity of 
250 units. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
10 
c. 
Methodology for determining a multi-family zoning district’s multi-family unit 
capacity 
 
MBTA communities seeking a determination of compliance must use the DHCD 
compliance model to provide an estimate of the number of multi-family housing units that can be 
developed as of right within the multi-family zoning district.  The multi-family unit capacity of an 
existing or proposed district shall be calculated using the unit capacity worksheet described in 
Appendix 2.   This worksheet produces an estimate of a district’s multi-family unit capacity using 
inputs such as the amount of developable land in the district, the dimensional requirements 
applicable to lots and buildings (including, for example, height limitations, lot coverage limitations, 
and maximum floor area ratio), and the parking space requirements applicable to multi-family uses.   
 
Minimum unit capacity is a measure of whether a multi-family zoning district is of a 
reasonable size, not a requirement to produce housing units.  Nothing in Section 3A or these 
guidelines should be interpreted as a mandate to construct a specified number of housing units, nor 
as a housing production target.  Demonstrating compliance with the minimum multi-family unit 
capacity requires only that an MBTA community show that the zoning allows multi-family housing 
as of right and that a sufficient number of multi-family housing units could be added to or replace 
existing uses and structures over time—even though such additions or replacements may be 
unlikely to occur soon.   
 
If an MBTA community has two or more zoning districts in which multi-family housing is 
allowed as of right, then two or more districts may be considered cumulatively to meet the 
minimum land area and minimum multi-family unit capacity requirements, as long as each district 
independently complies with Section 3A’s other requirements. 
 
d. 
Water and wastewater infrastructure within the multi-family zoning district 
 
MBTA communities are encouraged to consider the availability of water and wastewater 
infrastructure when selecting the location of a new multi-family zoning district.  But compliance 
with Section 3A does not require a municipality to install new water or wastewater infrastructure, or 
add to the capacity of existing infrastructure, to accommodate future multi-family housing 
production within the multi-family zoning district.  In most cases, multi-family housing can be 
created using private septic and wastewater treatment systems that meet state environmental 
standards.  Where public systems currently exist, but capacity is limited, private developers may be 
able to support the cost of necessary water and sewer extensions.  While the zoning must allow for 
gross average density of at least 15 units per acre, there may be other legal or practical limitations, 
including lack of infrastructure or infrastructure capacity, that result in actual housing production at 
lower density than the zoning allows. 
 
The multi-family unit capacity analysis does not need to take into consideration limitations 
on development resulting from existing water or wastewater infrastructure within the multi-family 
zoning district, or, in areas not served by public sewer, any applicable limitations under title 5 of the 
state environmental code.  For purposes of the unit capacity analysis, it is assumed that housing 
developers will design projects that work within existing water and wastewater constraints, and that 
developers, the municipality, or the Commonwealth will provide funding for infrastructure upgrades 
as needed for individual projects.  
 

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
11 
6. 
Minimum Gross Density 
 
Section 3A expressly requires that a multi-family zoning district—not just the individual lots 
of land within the district—must have a minimum gross density of 15 units per acre, subject to any 
further limitations imposed by section 40 of chapter 131 and title 5 of the state environmental code 
established pursuant to section 13 of chapter 21A.  The Zoning Act defines “gross density” as “a 
units-per-acre density measurement that includes land occupied by public rights-of-way and any 
recreational, civic, commercial and other nonresidential uses.” 
 
a. 
District-wide gross density 
 
To meet the district-wide gross density requirement, the dimensional restrictions and 
parking requirements for the multi-family zoning district must allow for a gross density of 15 units 
per acre of land within the district.  By way of example, to meet that requirement for a 40-acre 
multi-family zoning district, the zoning must allow for at least 15 multi-family units per acre, or a 
total of at least 600 multi-family units.   
 
For purposes of determining compliance with Section 3A’s gross density requirement, the 
DHCD compliance model will not count in the denominator any excluded land located within the 
multi-family zoning district, except public rights-of-way, private rights-of-way, and publicly-owned 
land used for recreational, civic, commercial, and other nonresidential uses.  This method of 
calculating minimum gross density respects the Zoning Act’s definition of gross density—“a units-
per-acre density measurement that includes land occupied by public rights-of-way and any 
recreational, civic, commercial and other nonresidential uses”—while making it unnecessary to 
draw patchwork multi-family zoning districts that carve out wetlands and other types of excluded 
land that are not developed or developable. 
 
b. 
Achieving district-wide gross density by sub-districts 
 
Zoning ordinances and by-laws typically limit the unit density on individual lots.  To 
comply with Section 3A’s gross density requirement, an MBTA community may establish 
reasonable sub-districts within a multi-family zoning district, with different density limits for each 
sub-district, provided that the gross density for the district as a whole meets the statutory 
requirement of not less than 15 multi-family units per acre.  DHCD will review sub-districts to 
ensure that the density allowed as of right in each sub-district is reasonable and not intended to 
frustrate the purpose of Section 3A by allowing projects of a such high density that they are not 
likely to be constructed. 
 
 
c. 
Wetland and septic considerations relating to density 
 
Section 3A provides that a district of reasonable size shall have a minimum gross density of 
15 units per acre, “subject to any further limitations imposed by section 40 of chapter 131 and title 5 
of the state environmental code established pursuant to section 13 of chapter 21A.”  This directive 
means that even though the zoning district must permit 15 units per acre as of right, any multi-
family housing produced within the district is subject to, and must comply with, the state wetlands 
protection act and title 5 of the state environmental code—even if such compliance means a 
proposed project will be less dense than 15 units per acre. 
 

===== PAGE 12 =====
 
12 
 
7. 
Determining Suitability for Families with Children 
 
Section 3A states that a compliant multi-family zoning district must allow multi-family 
housing as of right, and that “such multi-family housing shall be without age restrictions and shall 
be suitable for families with children.”  DHCD will deem a multi-family zoning district to comply 
with these requirements as long as the zoning does not require multi-family uses to include units 
with age restrictions, and does not limit or restrict the size of the units, cap the number of bedrooms, 
the size of bedrooms, or the number of occupants, or impose a minimum age of occupants.  Limits, 
if any, on the size of units or number of bedrooms established by state law or regulation are not 
relevant to Section 3A or to determinations of compliance made pursuant to these guidelines. 
 
8. 
Location of Districts 
 
a. General rule for determining the applicability of Section 3A’s location requirement  
 
Section 3A states that a compliant multi-family zoning district shall “be located not more 
than 0.5 miles from a commuter rail station, subway station, ferry terminal or bus station, if 
applicable.”  When an MBTA community has only a small amount of transit station area within its 
boundaries, it may not be possible or practical to locate all of the multi-family zoning district within 
0.5 miles of a transit station.  Transit station area may not be a practical location for a multi-family 
zoning district if it does not include developable land where multi-family housing can actually be 
constructed.  Therefore, for purposes of determining compliance with Section 3A, DHCD will 
consider the statute’s location requirement to be “applicable” to a particular MBTA community 
only if that community has within its borders at least 100 acres of developable station area.  DHCD 
will require more or less of the multi-family zoning district to be located within transit station areas 
depending on how much total developable station area is in that community, as shown on Table 2: 
 
Table 2. 
Total developable station area within  
the MBTA community (acres) 
 
Portion of the multi-family zoning district  
that must be within a transit station area 
0-100 
0% 
101-250 
20% 
251-400 
40% 
401-600 
50% 
601-800 
75% 
801+ 
90% 
 
 
The percentages specified in this table apply to both the minimum land area and the 
minimum multi-family unit capacity.  For example, in an MBTA community that has a total of 500 
acres of transit station area within its boundaries, a multi-family zoning district will comply with 
Section 3A’s location requirement if at least 50 percent of the district’s minimum land area is 
located within the transit station area, and at least 50 percent of the district’s minimum multi-family 
unit capacity is located within the transit station area. 
 
 

===== PAGE 13 =====
 
13 
A community with transit station areas associated with more than one transit station may 
locate the multi-family zoning district in any of the transit station areas.  For example, a rapid transit 
community with transit station area around a subway station in one part of town, and transit station 
area around a commuter rail station in another part of town, may locate its multi-family zoning 
district in either or both transit station areas. 
 
b. MBTA communities with limited or no transit station area 
 
When an MBTA community has less than 100 acres of developable station area within its 
boundaries, the MBTA community may locate the multi-family zoning district anywhere within its 
boundaries.  To encourage transit-oriented multi-family housing consistent with the general intent 
of Section 3A, MBTA communities are encouraged to consider locating the multi-family zoning 
district in an area with reasonable access to a transit station based on existing street 
patterns, pedestrian connections, and bicycle lanes, or in an area that qualifies as an “eligible 
location” as defined in Chapter 40A—for example, near an existing downtown or village center, 
near a regional transit authority bus stop or line, or in a location with existing under-utilized 
facilities that can be redeveloped into new multi-family housing.   
 
c. General guidance on district location applicable to all MBTA communities 
 
When choosing the location of a new multi-family zoning district, every MBTA community 
should consider how much of a proposed district is sensitive land on which permitting requirements 
and other considerations could make it challenging or inadvisable to construct multi-family housing.  
For example, an MBTA community may want to avoid including in a multi-family zoning district 
areas that are subject to flooding, or are known habitat for rare or threatened species, or have prime 
agricultural soils in active agricultural use.   
 
9. 
Determinations of Compliance 
 
 
Section 3A provides that any MBTA community that fails to comply with Section 3A’s 
requirements will be ineligible for funding from any of the listed funding sources.  DHCD will 
make determinations of compliance with Section 3A in accordance with these guidelines to inform 
state agency decisions on which MBTA communities are eligible to receive funding from the listed 
funding sources.  Determinations of compliance also may inform funding decisions by EOHED, 
DHCD, the MBTA and other state agencies which consider local housing policies when evaluating 
applications for discretionary grant programs, or making other discretionary funding decisions.    
 
 
DHCD interprets Section 3A as allowing every MBTA community a reasonable opportunity 
to enact zoning amendments as needed to come into compliance. Accordingly, DHCD will 
recognize both interim compliance, which means an MBTA community is taking active steps to 
enact a multi-family zoning district that complies with Section 3A, and district compliance, which 
is achieved when DHCD determines that an MBTA community has a multi-family zoning district 
that complies with Section 3A.  The requirements for interim and district compliance are described 
in more detail below.    
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 14 =====
 
14 
Table 3. 
Transit Category (# of 
municipalities) 
Deadline to Submit 
Action Plan  
 
Deadline to Submit  
District Compliance Application 
Rapid transit community (12) 
January 31, 2023 
December 31, 2023 
Commuter rail community (71) 
January 31, 2023 
December 31, 2024 
Adjacent community (58) 
January 31, 2023 
December 31, 2024 
Adjacent small town (34) 
January 31, 2023 
December 31, 2025 
 
a. 
Process to achieve interim compliance 
 
Many MBTA communities do not currently have a multi-family zoning district of 
reasonable size that complies with the requirements of Section 3A.  Prior to achieving district 
compliance (but no later than the deadlines set forth in Table 3), these MBTA communities can 
achieve interim compliance by taking the following affirmative steps towards the creation of a 
compliant multi-family zoning district.     
 
i. 
Creation and submission of an action plan.  An MBTA community seeking to 
achieve interim compliance must first submit an action plan on a form to be provided 
by DHCD.  An MBTA community action plan must provide information about 
current zoning, past planning for multi-family housing, if any, and potential locations 
for a multi-family zoning district.  The action plan also will require the MBTA 
community to establish a timeline for various actions needed to create a compliant 
multi-family zoning district.    
 
ii. 
DHCD approval of an action plan.  DHCD will review each submitted action plan 
for consistency with these guidelines, including but not limited to the timelines in 
Table 3.  If DHCD determines that the MBTA community’s action plan is reasonable 
and will lead to district compliance in a timely manner, DHCD will issue a 
determination of interim compliance.  DHCD may require modifications to a 
proposed action plan prior to approval.   
 
iii. 
Implementation of the action plan.  After DHCD approves an action plan and issues 
a determination of interim compliance, an MBTA community must diligently 
implement the action plan.  DHCD may revoke a determination of interim 
compliance if an MBTA community has not made sufficient progress in 
implementing an approved action plan.  DHCD and EOHED will review an MBTA 
community’s progress in implementing its action plan prior to making an award of 
funds under the Housing Choice Initiative and Massworks infrastructure program.   
 
iv. 
Deadlines for submitting action plans.  To achieve interim compliance for grants 
made through the 2023 One Stop Application, action plans must be submitted by no 
later than January 31, 2023.  An MBTA community that does not submit an action 
plan by that date may not receive a DHCD determination of interim compliance in 
time to receive an award of funds from the listed funding sources in 2023.  An 
MBTA community that does not achieve interim compliance in time for the 2023 
One Stop Application may submit an action plan to become eligible for a subsequent 
round of the One Stop Application, provided that an action plan must be submitted 

===== PAGE 15 =====
 
15 
by no later than January 31 of the year in which the MBTA community seeks to 
establish grant eligibility; and provided further that no action plan may be submitted 
or approved after the applicable district compliance application deadline set forth in 
Table 3.   
  
b. 
Assistance for communities implementing an action plan.   
 
MBTA communities are encouraged to communicate as needed with DHCD staff 
throughout the process of implementing an action plan.  DHCD will endeavor to respond to 
inquiries about whether a proposed multi-family zoning district complies with Section 3A prior to a 
vote by the municipal legislative body to create or modify such a district.  Such requests shall be 
made on a form to be provided by DHCD and should be submitted at least 90 days prior to the vote 
of the legislative body.   
 
c. Requests for determination of district compliance 
 
When an MBTA community believes it has a multi-family zoning district that complies with 
Section 3A, it may request a determination of district compliance from DHCD.  Such a request may 
be made for a multi-family zoning district that was in existence on the date that Section 3A became 
law, or for a multi-family zoning district that was created or amended after the enactment of Section 
3A.  In either case, such request shall be made on an application form required by DHCD and shall 
include, at a minimum, the following information.  Municipalities will need to submit:  
 
(i) 
A certified copy of the municipal zoning ordinance or by-law and zoning map, 
including all provisions that relate to uses and structures in the multi-family zoning 
district. 
(ii) 
An estimate of multi-family unit capacity using the compliance model. 
(iii) 
GIS shapefile for the multi-family zoning district. 
(iv) 
In the case of a by-law enacted by a town, evidence that the clerk has submitted a 
copy of the adopted multi-family zoning district to the office of the Attorney General 
for approval as required by state law, or evidence of the Attorney General’s 
approval. 
 
After receipt of a request for determination of district compliance, DHCD will notify the 
requesting MBTA community within 30 days if additional information is required to process the 
request.  Upon reviewing a complete application, DHCD will provide the MBTA community a 
written determination either stating that the existing multi-family zoning district complies with 
Section 3A, or identifying the reasons why the multi-family zoning district fails to comply with 
Section 3A and the steps that must be taken to achieve compliance.  An MBTA community that has 
achieved interim compliance prior to requesting a determination of district compliance shall remain 
in interim compliance for the period during which a request for determination of district 
compliance, with all required information, is pending at DHCD. 
 
10. 
Ongoing Obligations; Rescission of a Determination of Compliance 
 
After receiving a determination of compliance, an MBTA community must notify DHCD in 
writing of any zoning amendment or proposed zoning amendment that affects the compliant multi-
family zoning district, or any other by-law, ordinance, rule or regulation that limits the development 

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
16 
of multi-family housing in the multi-family zoning district.  DHCD may rescind a determination of 
district compliance, or require changes to a multi-family zoning district to remain in compliance, if 
DHCD determines that:  
 
(i) 
The MBTA community submitted inaccurate information in its application for a 
determination of compliance; 
(ii) 
The MBTA community failed to notify DHCD of a zoning amendment that affects 
the multi-family zoning district; 
(iii) 
The MBTA community enacts or amends any by-law or ordinance, or other rule or 
regulation, that materially alters the minimum land area and/or the multi-family unit 
capacity in the multi-family zoning district;  
(iv) 
A board, authority or official in the MBTA community does not issue permits, or 
otherwise acts or fails to act, to allow construction of a multi-family housing project 
that is allowed as of right in the multi-family zoning district; 
(v) 
The MBTA community takes other action that causes the multi-family zoning district 
to no longer comply with Section 3A; or 
(vi) 
An MBTA community with an approved multi-family zoning district has changed 
transit category as a result of a newly opened or decommissioned transit station, or 
the establishment of permanent, regular service at a transit station where there was 
formerly intermittent or event-based service. 
 
11. 
Changes to MBTA Service 
 
Section 3A applies to the 175 MBTA communities identified in section 1A of the Zoning 
Act and section 1 of chapter 161A of the General Laws. When MBTA service changes, the list of 
MBTA communities and/or the transit category assignments of those MBTA communities in 
Appendix 1 may change as well.  
 
The transit category assignments identified in Appendix 1 of these guidelines reflect certain 
MBTA service changes that will result from new infrastructure now under construction in 
connection with the South Coast Rail and Green Line Extension projects.  These service changes 
include the opening of new Green Line stations and commuter rail stations, as well as the 
elimination of regular commuter rail service at the Lakeville station.  These changes are scheduled 
to take effect in all cases a year or more before any municipal district compliance deadline.  
Affected MBTA communities are noted in Appendix 1. 
 
Municipalities that are not now identified as MBTA communities and may be identified as 
such in the future are not addressed in these guidelines or included in Appendix 1.  New MBTA 
communities will be addressed with revisions to Appendix 1, and separate compliance timelines, in 
the future.  
 
Future changes to Silver Line routes or stations may change district location requirements 
when expanded high-capacity service combined with new facilities creates a bus station where there 
was not one before.  Changes to other bus routes, including the addition or elimination of bus stops 
or reductions or expansions of bus service levels, do not affect the transit categories assigned to 
MBTA communities and will not affect location requirements for multi-family zoning districts.  
Any future changes to MBTA transit service, transit routes and transit service levels are determined 
by the MBTA Board of Directors consistent with the MBTA’s Service Delivery Policy.   

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
17 
 
 
 
List of Appendices: 
 
Appendix 1:  MBTA Community Categories and Requirements 
 
Appendix 2:  Compliance Methodology/Model 

===== PAGE 18 =====
 
Appendix 1 
Page 1 
Appendix 1:  
MBTA Community Categories and Requirements 
 
Community 
Community 
category 
2020 
Housing 
Units 
 Minimum 
multi-family 
unit capacity*  
 Minimum 
land 
area**  
 Developable 
station 
area***  
% of district to 
be located in 
station area 
Abington 
Commuter Rail 
   
6,811  
   
1,022  
   
50  
   
307  
40% 
Acton 
Commuter Rail 
   
9,219  
   
1,383  
   
50  
   
246  
20% 
Amesbury 
Adjacent Community 
   
7,889  
   
789  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Andover 
Commuter Rail 
   
13,541  
   
2,031  
   
50  
   
587  
50% 
Arlington 
Adjacent Community 
   
20,461  
   
2,046  
   
32  
   
58  
0% 
Ashburnham 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
2,730  
   
137  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Ashby 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
1,243  
   
62  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Ashland 
Commuter Rail 
   
7,495  
   
1,124  
   
50  
   
272  
40% 
Attleboro 
Commuter Rail 
   
19,097  
   
2,865  
   
50  
   
467  
50% 
Auburn 
Adjacent Community 
   
6,999  
   
750  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Ayer 
Commuter Rail 
   
3,807  
   
750  
   
50  
   
284  
40% 
Bedford 
Adjacent Community 
   
5,444  
   
750  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Bellingham 
Adjacent Community 
   
6,749  
   
750  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Belmont 
Commuter Rail 
   
10,882  
   
1,632  
   
27  
   
502  
50% 
Berkley 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
2,360  
   
118  
   
-   
   
79  
0% 
Beverly 
Commuter Rail 
   
17,887  
   
2,683  
   
50  
   
1,435  
90% 
Billerica 
Commuter Rail 
   
15,485  
   
2,323  
   
50  
   
308  
40% 
Bourne 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
11,140  
   
557  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Boxborough 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
2,362  
   
118  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Boxford 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
2,818  
   
141  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Braintree 
Rapid Transit 
   
15,077  
   
3,769  
   
50  
   
485  
50% 
Bridgewater 
Commuter Rail 
   
9,342  
   
1,401  
   
50  
   
181  
20% 
Brockton 
Commuter Rail 
   
37,304  
   
5,596  
   
50  
   
995  
90% 
Brookline 
Rapid Transit 
   
27,961  
   
6,990  
   
41  
   
1,349  
90% 

===== PAGE 19 =====
 
Appendix 1 
Page 2 
Community 
Community 
category 
2020 
Housing 
Units 
 Minimum 
multi-family 
unit capacity*  
 Minimum 
land 
area**  
 Developable 
station 
area***  
% of district to 
be located in 
station area 
Burlington 
Adjacent Community 
   
10,431  
   
1,043  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Cambridge 
Rapid Transit 
   
53,907  
   
13,477  
   
32  
   
1,392  
90% 
Canton 
Commuter Rail 
   
9,930  
   
1,490  
   
50  
   
451  
50% 
Carlisle 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
1,897  
   
95  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Carver 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
4,701  
   
235  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Chelmsford 
Adjacent Community 
   
14,769  
   
1,477  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Chelsea 
Rapid Transit 
   
14,554  
   
3,639  
   
14  
   
608  
75% 
Cohasset 
Commuter Rail 
   
3,341  
   
638  
   
43  
   
241  
20% 
Concord 
Commuter Rail 
   
7,295  
   
1,094  
   
50  
   
519  
50% 
Danvers 
Adjacent Community 
   
11,763  
   
1,176  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Dedham 
Commuter Rail 
   
10,459  
   
1,569  
   
49  
   
507  
50% 
Dover 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
2,046  
   
102  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Dracut 
Adjacent Community 
   
12,325  
   
1,233  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Duxbury 
Adjacent Community 
   
6,274  
   
750  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
East Bridgewater 
Adjacent Community 
   
5,211  
   
750  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Easton 
Adjacent Community 
   
9,132  
   
913  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Essex 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
1,662  
   
83  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 
Everett 
Rapid Transit 
   
18,208  
   
4,552  
   
22  
   
200  
20% 
Fitchburg 
Commuter Rail 
   
17,452  
   
2,618  
   
50  
   
601  
75% 
Foxborough 
Adjacent Community 
   
7,682  
   
768  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Framingham 
Commuter Rail 
   
29,033  
   
4,355  
   
50  
   
270  
40% 
Franklin 
Commuter Rail 
   
12,551  
   
1,883  
   
50  
   
643  
75% 
Freetown 
Commuter Rail 
   
3,485  
   
750  
   
50  
   
346  
40% 
Georgetown 
Adjacent Community 
   
3,159  
   
750  
   
50  
   
-   
0% 
Gloucester 
Commuter Rail 
   
15,133  
   
2,270  
   
50  
   
430  
50% 
Grafton 
Adjacent Community 
   
7,760  
   
776  
   
50  
   
82  
0% 
Groton 
Adjacent Small Town 
   
4,153  
   
208  
   
-   
   
-   
0% 

===== PAGE 25 =====
 
Appendix 1 
Page 8 
 

===== PAGE 26 =====
Appendix 2 
Page 1 
Appendix 2 
 
Compliance Model Overview 
 
 
The purpose of the compliance model is to ensure a consistent approach to measuring and 
evaluating multi-family zoning districts for compliance with Section 3A.  The compliance model 
is intended to create a reasonable estimate of multi-family unit capacity of each multi-family 
zoning district.  It is not intended to provide a precise determination of how many units may be 
developed on any individual lot or combination of lots.  
 
The model uses geospatial tax parcel data from local assessors, compiled and hosted by 
MassGIS, to define lot boundaries and dimensions in each multi-family zoning district. The 
model also captures key dimensional and regulatory elements of the multi-family zoning district 
that impact multi-family unit capacity.  The product of the compliance model is a Microsoft 
Excel workbook that must be submitted as part of a compliance application to DHCD.  
Consultant support is available at no cost to assist MBTA communities in meeting all the 
technical requirements of compliance.   
 
The Compliance Modeling Process at a Glance: 
 
 

===== PAGE 27 =====
Appendix 2 
Page 2 
 
 
Components of the Compliance Model 
 
Land database 
 
The compliance model includes geospatial parcel data for each MBTA community that 
identifies how much land area on each lot within a multi-family zoning district is developable 
land. Applicants will prepare this parcel data for the model’s calculations by creating a shapefile 
for each district, measuring each district’s land area, and exporting all lot records within the 
district’s boundaries into an Excel or .csv file. These exported tables can then be pasted into the 
zoning review checklist and unit capacity estimator, described below.  
 
Zoning review checklist and unit capacity estimator 
 
To capture the data needed to estimate a district’s multi-family unit capacity, 
municipalities will be required to complete a zoning review checklist.  The checklist is of a series 
of questions and responses about allowed residential uses, parking requirements, dimensional 
restrictions (such as maximum building height and minimum open space), and other regulatory 
elements applicable in the district.  
 
The unit capacity estimator uses the GIS exported lot information from the land database 
and the information entered into the zoning review checklist to calculate an estimate of the 
maximum number of multi-family residential units that could be constructed on each lot in each 
district as of right. It then aggregates the unit capacity estimates for each lot into an estimate of 
total unit capacity for each district.  It also derives an estimate of the gross density for each 
district. 
 
Case-Specific Refinements to the Compliance Model Inputs and Outputs 
 
To ensure the integrity and reasonableness of each unit capacity estimate, DHCD may 
adjust the compliance model inputs and outputs as necessary to account for physical conditions 
or zoning restrictions not adequately captured by the compliance model.  For example, DHCD 
may override the GIS data and change one or more lots from excluded land to developable land 
where a municipality demonstrates those lots meet the definition of developable land.  DHCD 
may also adjust the unit capacity estimator’s algorithm when it does not adequately account for 
an atypical zoning requirement or other local development restriction that will clearly impact 
unit capacity. 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
