
===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
 
Via Email: 
mayor@cityofmalden.org  
 
June 11, 2025 
 
Mayor Gary Christenson 
Malden City Hall 
215 Pleasant Street 
Malden MA 02148 
 
Re: Malden – Determination of Compliance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Section 3A) 
 
Honorable Mayor Christenson: 
 
Congratulations! The Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) reviewed the 
materials provided by the City of Malden in response to EOHLC’s determination of conditional 
compliance dated November 8, 2024, for the MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay District and 
Mandatory Mixed-use Overlay District (together, “District”). After careful review and analysis, EOHLC 
determined that Malden is compliant with Section 3A and 760 CMR 72.00 (the Regulations). EOHLC 
recognizes the diligent work by the City of Malden to meet the requirements of the MBTA 
Communities Law.   
 
Please note that this determination of compliance by EOHLC qualifies Malden for the MBTA 
Communities Catalyst Fund. You can learn more about this grant program at the MBTA Communities 
Catalyst Fund website. This grant program is part of the Community One Stop for Growth, a single 
application portal and collaborative review process. Contact EOHLCMBTACommCatalyst@mass.gov 
with questions. 
 
Malden is designated as a Rapid Transit Community with 27,721 existing housing units per the 2020 
United States Decennial Census. The City is required to have a district with a minimum land area of 
31 acres, and a minimum multi-family unit capacity of 6,930 units. At least fifty percent (50%) of the 
District’s minimum requirements must be met within ½ mile of transit stations.  
 
EOHLC conducted a thorough review of the application, and made the following determinations: 
 
1. The District comprises 162.20 acres. 
2. As of right multi-family unit capacity for the District is estimated at 6,932 units.   
3. The gross density of the District is estimated at 45.0 dwelling units per acre. 
4. At least fifty percent (50%) of the District is one contiguous land area as currently configured. 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF HOUSING & 
LIVABLE COMMUNITIES 
Maura T. Healey, Governor      Kimberley Driscoll, Lieutenant Governor      Edward M. Augustus Jr., Secretary 
 
100 Cambridge Street, Suite 300 
   
www.mass.gov 
Boston, Massachusetts  02114 
 
617.573.1100  

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
5. At least fifty percent (50%) of the required District land area and estimated unit capacity is 
within transit station areas. 
6. For projects 8 units and over, the District contains an Inclusionary Zoning requirement that 
required support from an Economic Feasibility Analysis pursuant to Section 72.04(1)(b)1b.  
EOHLC determined that the Economic Feasibility Analysis and the supplemental 
information provided by the City support the feasibility of multi-family housing 
development in the district.  
7. Twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the minimum unit capacity requirement is satisfied by a 
“Mandatory Mixed Use” (MMU) area pursuant to Section 72.05(1)(c) of the Regulations. 
8. The multi-family housing allowed in the District is suitable for families with children pursuant 
to Section 3A and Section 72.07 of the Regulations. 
9. There are no dimensional zoning requirements not captured by the compliance model that are 
likely to substantially affect the District’s estimated multi-family unit capacity.  
10.  Taken as a whole, the District meets the land area, multi-family unit capacity, gross density, 
and contiguity requirements of Section 3A and the Regulations.  
 
The following table shows the required District minimums, the estimates submitted in the district 
compliance application as revised, and estimates as determined by EOHLC following its review:  
 
Required 
Submitted 
Determined 
Land area (acres) 
31 
162.5 
162.2 
Multi-family unit capacity 
(units) 
6,930 
6,932 
6,932 
Gross density (units per 
acre) 
15 
43.6 
45.0 
One 50% contiguous area 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
EOHLC identified the following discrepancies from the submitted unit capacity and gross density 
metrics: 
 
• EOHLC reduced the District land area by 0.3 acres in connection with mapping changes 
adopted in response to EOHLC’s determination of conditional compliance.  
 
• EOHLC adjusted the gross density calculation to reflect the change in land area described 
above, and to remove the MMU portion of the District from the calculation 
 
 
Please note that continued district compliance is subject to the following requirements: 
 
• Municipalities must notify EOHLC in writing of any proposed or active zoning amendment that 
affects the district, or of any other by-law, ordinance, rule, regulation, or municipal action that 
limits the development of multi-family housing in the District. This notification must be sent 
to EOHLC3A@mass.gov prior to any planning board public hearing on the proposed zoning 
amendment. 
• EOHLC may rescind a determination of district compliance or require changes to the District 
to remain in compliance pursuant to Section 72.10 of the Regulations, or if it becomes aware 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
of additional information not identified in this compliance review that would render the 
District noncompliant with Section 3A. 
 
While housing production is not required, EOHLC is eager to hear about multi-family developments 
in your MBTA Communities District, please share permit activity with us at EOHLC3A@mass.gov. If 
you have questions or need further assistance regarding this determination, please contact MBTA 
Communities Compliance Coordinator Nathan Carlucci, at nathan.carlucci@mass.gov.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Edward M. Augustus, Jr. 
Secretary 
 
cc: 
Senator Jason Lewis, Jason.Lewis@masenate.gov  
 
Representative Paul Donato, Paul.Donato@mahouse.gov  
 
Representative Kate Lipper-Garabedian, Kate.Lipper-Garabedian@mahouse.gov  
 
Representative Steven Ultrino, Steven.Ultrino@mahouse.gov  
 
Deborah Burke, City of Malden, dburke@cityofmalden.org  
 
Michelle Romero, City of Malden, mromero@cityofmalden.org 
