
===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
 
Via Email: townadministrator@manchester.ma.us  
 
August 6, 2025 
 
Antonio Barletta, Town Administrator 
Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea 
10 Central Street 
Manchester, MA 01944 
 
Re: Manchester-by-the-Sea - Determination of Compliance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
(Section 3A) 
 
Dear Town Administrator Barletta, 
 
Congratulations! The Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) reviewed the 
district compliance application for the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea’s Community Housing 
Overlay District (District).  After careful review and analysis, EOHLC determined that Manchester-
by-the-Sea is compliant with Section 3A and 760 CMR 72.00 (the Regulations). EOHLC recognizes 
the diligent work performed by the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea to meet the requirements of the 
MBTA Communities Law. 
 
Please note that this determination of compliance by EOHLC qualifies Manchester-by-the-Sea for the 
MBTA Communities Catalyst Fund. You can learn more about this grant program at the MBTA 
Communities Catalyst Fund website. This grant program is a part of the Community One Stop for 
Growth, a single application portal and collaborative review process. Contact 
EOHLCMBTACommCatalyst@mass.gov with questions. 
 
Manchester-by-the-Sea is designated as a Commuter Rail Community with 2,433 existing housing 
units per the 2020 United States Decennial Census. The Town is required to have a district with a 
minimum land area of 37 acres and a minimum multi-family unit capacity of 559 units. At least forty 
percent (40%) of the Town’s requirements must be met within ½ miles of transit stations. 
 
EOHLC conducted a thorough review of the application and made the following determinations: 
 
1. The District comprises 39.72 acres. 
2. As of right multi-family unit capacity for the district is estimated at 586 units. 
3. The gross density of the District is estimated at 15.1 dwelling units per acre.  
4. At least fifty percent (50%) of the District is one contiguous land area. 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF HOUSING & 
LIVABLE COMMUNITIES 
Maura T. Healey, Governor      Kimberley Driscoll, Lieutenant Governor      Edward M. Augustus Jr., Secretary 
 
100 Cambridge Street, Suite 300 
   
www.mass.gov 
Boston, Massachusetts  02114 
 
617.573.1100  

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
5. At least forty percent (40%) of the required District land area and estimated unit capacity is 
within transit station areas. 
6. The multi-family housing allowed as of right in the district is suitable for families with 
children. 
7. There are no dimensional zoning requirements not captured by the compliance model that 
are likely to substantially affect the District’s estimated multi-family unit capacity. 
8. The District contains an Inclusionary Zoning requirement of 20% of units for projects 5 units 
and over which must be affordable to households at or below 80% of Area Median Income 
(AMI). EOHLC finds the submitted Economic Feasibility Analysis supports the feasibility of 
multi-family development in the District.  
9. Taken as a whole, the District meets the land area, multi-family unit capacity, gross density, 
and contiguity requirements of Section 3A and the Regulations.  
 
The following table shows the required District minimums, the estimates submitted in the District 
application, and estimates as determined by EOHLC following its review: 
 
Required 
Submitted 
Determined 
Land area (acres) 
37 
39.72 
39.72 
Multi-family unit capacity 
(units) 
559 
586 
586 
Gross density (units per 
acre) 
15 
15.1 
15.1 
One 50% contiguous area 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
EOHLC identified the following additional factor that could affect as of right multi-family housing 
development in the District: 
 
• The standards set forth in the design standards, site plan review and aesthetic standards 
sections of Manchester-by-the-Sea’s zoning bylaw lean towards discretionary criteria which 
may affect “as of right” approvals for development proposals in the District. EOHLC cautions 
Manchester-by-the-Sea against applying site plan review criteria in a discretionary manner 
that is inconsistent with G.L. c. 40A, Sections 1A and 3A. 
 
Please note that continued district compliance is subject to the following requirements: 
 
• Municipalities must notify EOHLC in writing of any proposed or active zoning amendment 
that affects the district, or of any other by-law, ordinance, rule, regulation, or municipal 
action that limits the development of multi-family housing in the District. This notification 
must be sent to EOHLC3A@mass.gov prior to any planning board public hearing on the 
proposed zoning amendment. 
 
• EOHLC may establish a system to monitor compliance over time to ensure that approved 
districts allow multi-family housing in accordance with the criteria under which they were 
approved. 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
• EOHLC may rescind a determination of district compliance or require changes to the District 
to remain in compliance as per Section 72.10 of the Regulations.  
 
• Permitting conducted in connection with the additional factor listed above must not 
effectively reduce the estimated multi-family unit capacity of the District. If those factors 
reduce the estimated multi-family unit capacity of the District, EOHLC may revisit 
Manchester-by-the-Sea’s compliance with Section 3A, and could require the Town to remedy 
any deficiency with amendments to its zoning.   
 
While housing production is not required, EOHLC is eager to hear about multi-family developments 
in your MBTA Communities District; please share permit activity with us at EOHLC3A@mass.gov. If 
you have questions or need further assistance regarding this determination, please contact MBTA 
Communities Compliance Coordinator Nathan Carlucci, at nathan.carlucci@mass.gov.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Edward M. Augustus, Jr. 
Secretary 
 
cc: 
Senator Bruce Tarr, Bruce.Tarr@masenate.gov 
Representative Ann-Margaret Ferrante, Ann-Margaret.Ferrante@mahouse.gov 
Marc Resnick, Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea, ResnickM@manchester.ma.us  
 
