
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 17, 2023  3:52 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Medfield
1.2. Community Category
Adjacent community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
750
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Sarah Raposa
1.7a. Title
Town Planner
1.7b. Email Address
sraposa@medfield.net
1.7c. Phone Number
(508) 906-3027
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Gus Murby

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
459 Main Street
Medfield, MA 02052
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
gmurby1651@gmail.com
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Kristine Trierweiler, Town Administrator
Frank Gervasio, Assistant Town Administrator
Brittney Franklin, Town Administrator's Assistant 
Board of Selectmen
Planning Board
Affordable Housing Trust
Medfield State Hospital (MSH) Development Committee
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
MSH Strategic Reuse Master Plan (2018)
MSH Zoning District (2019 STM)
Land Disposition Agreement between Town and State (2014)
Land Disposition Agreement between Town and Trinity (2022)
Townwide Master Plan Goal 8
2016 Housing Production Plan
2022 Housing Production Plan
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
1.) 334 rental units at MSH; 2.) 24 senior ownership units on town owned
land adjacent to senior center; 3.) Housing Options Program RFP to off-set
costs for producing affordable units; 4.) Developing strategy for group
homes
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
a. An existing zoning district or districts that might already comply with the
Section 3A Guidelines
b. An existing zoning district or districts that must be amended to comply
with the Section 3A Guidelines
c. A new 40R or other overlay zoning district

===== PAGE 3 =====
3.1a. Please identify and briefly describe
the possibly-compliant district(s),
including any characteristics of existing
development or transit options that
make it suitable for use as this
community's 3A-compliant district.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents.
Medfield State Hospital 
Downtown Medfield Business & Business Industrial areas
Montrose School
Upper Spring Street Overlay District 
East Main Street Business District
East Main Street Residential adjacent to Business
Lovells Nursery 
3.1b. Please select the changes that
may be necessary for the existing
district to comply. Optional: Attach any
supporting documents that describe
this district.
District boundaries
Use schedule
Dimensional regulations
Parking requirements
Explanation:
RKG/Innes will help the Town explore how much of the Medfield State
Hospital district complies with the requirement and then analyze additional
areas within Medfield to explore multi-family use and associated
dimensional, parking requirements, and development constraints. 
3.1c. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location. Optional:
Attach any supporting documents that
show planning work the community has
already done for this district(s).
The Town worked with MHP/RKG/Innes on the MBTA Early Adopters
Program technical assistance program. 
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14021668482
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
MSH District project by Trinity Financial combines historic preservation and
multi-family housing goals. One other proposal was received from Pulte
that would demo the buildings and construct up to 702 units in a
townhouse/apartment configuration. The Town's 2014 Land Disposition
Agreement with the State mandated a conscientious effort to retain the
original buildings during redevelopment/disposition. 
Other issues include: existing road networks, sidewalks/walkability/bike
lanes, existing commercial uses, 
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline

===== PAGE 4 =====
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Public outreach with town boards and committees
Aug 01, 2022
Jan 31, 2023
Short Answer
Applying DHCD's compliance model to test for density and unit capacity
Feb 01, 2023
May 31, 2023
Short Answer
Developing zoning 
Jun 01, 2023
Jun 30, 2024
Short Answer
Holding public hearings on proposed zoning 
Jul 01, 2024
Oct 31, 2024
Short Answer
Hold Special Town Meeting to adopt compliant zoning 
Nov 01, 2024
Nov 30, 2024
Short Answer
Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Dec 01, 2024
