
===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
 
Via Email: jgrigoraitis@cityofmelrose.org  
 
September 22, 2025 
 
The Honorable Mayor Jennifer Grigoraitis 
City of Melrose 
562 Main Street  
Melrose, MA 02176 
 
Re: Melrose – Determination of Compliance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Section 3A) 
 
Dear Mayor Grigoraitis, 
 
Congratulations! The Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) reviewed the 
district compliance application for the City of Melrose’s Rail Corridor Overlay District, Smart Growth 
Overlay District, Urban Residential D District, and Medical Business District (collectively, “District”). 
After careful review and analysis, EOHLC determined that Melrose is compliant with Section 3A 
and 760 CMR 72.00 (the Regulations). EOHLC recognizes the diligent work by the City of Melrose to 
meet the requirements of the MBTA Communities Law. 
 
Please note that this determination of compliance by EOHLC qualifies Melrose for the MBTA 
Communities Catalyst Fund. You can learn more about this grant program at the MBTA 
Communities Catalyst Fund website. This grant program is part of the Community One Stop for 
Growth, a single application portal and collaborative review process. Contact 
EOHLCMBTACommCatalyst@mass.gov with questions. 
 
Melrose is designated a Commuter Rail community with 12,614 existing housing units per the 2020 
United States Decennial Census. The City is required to have a district with a minimum land area of 
25 acres and a minimum multi-family unit capacity of 1,892 units. At least seventy-five percent 
(75%) of the District’s requirements must be met within transit station areas. 
 
EOHLC conducted a thorough review of the application, and made the following determinations: 
 
1. The District comprises 120.7 acres. 
2. As of right multi-family unit capacity for the District is estimated at 2,205 units. 
3. The gross density of the District is estimated at 15.3 units per acre. 
4. At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the District is one contiguous land area. 
5. The multi-family housing allowed as of right in the District is suitable for families with 
children pursuant to Section 3A and Section 72.07 of the Regulations. 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF HOUSING & 
LIVABLE COMMUNITIES 
Maura T. Healey, Governor      Kimberley Driscoll, Lieutenant Governor      Edward M. Augustus Jr., Secretary 
 
100 Cambridge Street, Suite 300 
   
www.mass.gov 
Boston, Massachusetts  02114 
 
617.573.1100  

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
6. There are no dimensional zoning requirements not captured by the compliance model that 
are likely to substantially affect the District’s estimated multi-family unit capacity.  
7. Taken as a whole, the District meets the land area, multi-family unit capacity, gross density, 
and contiguity requirements of Section 3A and the Regulations.   
8. Twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the minimum unit capacity requirement is satisfied by 
two “Mandatory Mixed Use” (MMU) areas, called the Business A-1 and Business A-2 
subdistricts, pursuant to Section 72.05(c) of the Regulations.  
9. The District contains an Inclusionary Zoning requirement for 15% of units to be set aside for 
households earning 80% or less of Area Median Income for projects containing five or more 
dwelling units. EOHLC determined that the submitted Economic Feasibility Analysis supports 
the feasibility of multi-family development in the District. 
 
The following table shows the required District minimums, the estimates submitted in the District 
application, and estimates as determined by EOHLC following its review: 
 
Required 
Submitted 
Determined 
Land area (acres) 
25 
107.7 
120.7 
Multi-family unit capacity (units) 
1,892 
1,976 
2,205 
Gross density (units per acre) 
15 
15.0 
15.3 
One 50% contiguous area 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
EOHLC identified the following discrepancy from the submitted unit capacity, land area, and 
density metrics: 
 
• The above determined estimates are based on updated materials submitted to EOHLC by the 
City of Melrose. 
 
Please note that continued district compliance is subject to the following requirements: 
 
• Municipalities must notify EOHLC in writing of any proposed or active zoning amendment 
that affects the district, or of any other by-law, ordinance, rule, regulation, or municipal 
action that limits the development of multi-family housing in the District. This notification 
must be sent to EOHLC3A@mass.gov prior to any planning board public hearing on the 
proposed zoning amendment. 
 
• EOHLC may establish a system to monitor compliance over time to ensure that approved 
districts allow multi-family housing in accordance with the criteria under which they were 
approved. 
 
• EOHLC may rescind a determination of district compliance or require changes to the District 
to remain in compliance pursuant to Section 72.10 of the Regulations, or if it becomes aware 
of additional information not identified in this compliance review that would render the 
District noncompliant with Section 3A. 
 
• Permitting conducted must not effectively reduce the estimated multi-family unit capacity of 
the District. If permitting processes effectively reduce the estimated multi-family unit 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
capacity of the District, EOHLC may revisit Melrose’s compliance with Section 3A, and could 
require the City to remedy any deficiency with amendments to its zoning. 
 
While housing production is not required, EOHLC is eager to hear about multi-family developments 
in your MBTA Communities District.  Please share permit activity with us at EOHLC3A@mass.gov. If 
you have questions or need further assistance regarding this determination, please contact MBTA 
Communities Compliance Coordinator Nathan Carlucci, at nathan.carlucci@mass.gov. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Edward M. Augustus, Jr. 
Secretary 
 
cc: 
Senator Jason Lewis, Jason.Lewis@masenate.gov  
 
Representative Kate Lipper-Garabedian, kate.lipper-garabedian@mahouse.gov  
 
Lori Massa, City of Melrose, lmassa@cityofmelrose.org 
  
