
===== PAGE 1 =====
TOWN OF MILLBURY 
WARRANT 
SPECIAL TOWN MEETING 
Saturday, November 9, 2024,   1:00 P.M. 
Millbury Memorial JR/SR High School 
12 Martin Street, Millbury 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Date: 
October 1, 2024 
To:  
Residents of Millbury 
From:  Town Manager & Finance Director 
Re:  
Special Town Meeting 
 
The Town of Millbury utilizes an open town meeting form of government, which is a method of municipal 
government in which all qualified voters in Town have an opportunity to assemble to debate and vote on 
certain financial and policy issues. This document is the warrant, or agenda, for such a meeting. A special 
town meeting will be held on SATURDAY November 9, 2024 at 1:00 PM at Millbury Memorial High 
School. A large portion of the attendees at our May meeting indicated that they would like to have Saturday 
Town Meetings.  
 
The warrant is composed of articles, each of which represents an item of Town business that taxpayers have 
the right to debate and vote upon. Below is a table that provides a summary of each article, essentially a 
table of contents, and proposed funding source as voted by the Finance Committee at their meeting on 
September 30 which is available for viewing on demand. You may wish to view portions of that meeting 
to clarify any questions you may have. The warrant will be available on the Town’s website 
www.millburyma.gov. On the home page, scroll down to “What’s Happening in Millbury” and click on 
Special Town Meeting Warrant.  
 
Article 
Description 
 Amount  
Funding Source 
1 
Prior Year Bills 
$              49.95 
FY25 Budget 
2 
Long Term Debt Interest Payment 
$       73,756.00 
Reserve/Premium 
3 
Rescind Debt Authorization 
 
 
4 
Citizen Petition: Rice Road Improvements 
$  4,000,000.00 
Raise & Appropriate 
5 
General Bylaws: Stormwater Regulations 
 
 
6 
Citizen Petition: Zoning Bylaw Overlay Districts  
 
 
7 
Citizen Petition: Zoning Bylaw Accessory Dwelling 
 
 
8 
Zoning Bylaw: Multi-Family Overlay District 
 
 
Totals: 
Raise & Appropriate (budget increase) 
$  4,000,000.00 
 
Free Cash 
$                0.00 
 
Use of FY25 Funds 
$              49.95 
Available Capital Reserve/Premium 
$       73,756.00 
 
On behalf of the Board of Selectmen, we invite you to attend the Special Town Meeting on November 9th. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
 
Karyn E. Clark 
Jennifer Barrett 
Town Manager 
Finance Director 
 

===== PAGE 3 =====
SPECIAL TOWN MEETING 
VOTING UPON REVISIONS TO THE 
FISCAL YEAR 2025 OPERATING BUDGET AND OTHER ITEMS REQUIRING 
LOCAL LEGISLATIVE ACTION 
 
 
Town of Millbury Constables:  
 
In the name of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, you are hereby directed to notify and warn the 
inhabitants of the Town of Millbury qualified to vote in town affairs to meet at their respective meeting 
place, the Millbury Memorial JR/SR High School, 12 Martin Street in said Town of Millbury on: 
 
Saturday, November 9, 2024 at 1:00 P.M. 
 
Then and there to vote on the articles contained herein. 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 1:  To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available funds such 
sums as required to pay prior fiscal years bills, or take any other action thereon. (Board of Selectmen) 
(Required Vote: 9/10ths Majority) 
Vendor 
Invoice Date 
Cost 
Department 
Account 
Cranes 101 
2/29/2024 
$49.95 
DPW Highway 
001-410-5700-000000 
 
Rationale: Cranes 101 provided training for a hoisting license for DPW staff. The invoice was received 
after the year was closed, but there were sufficient funds available in the budget, had the invoice been 
received on time. This invoice will be paid from the current fiscal year’s budget account. 
 
Recommendation: The Finance Committee recommends Article 1 as written. 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 2:  To see if the town will vote to raise and appropriate, transfer from available funds, or 
otherwise provide the sum of $73,756 to pay the first interest payment on bonds issued for various projects 
and acquisitions, or take any other action thereon. (Board of Selectmen) (Required Vote: Simple Majority) 
 
Rationale: Premium received from previous borrowing is still available for appropriation to pay other 
costs for borrowing. During the planning for the current year’s BANs/Bonds, the rate for long-term 
borrowing was the same as short term BANs. Management made the decision to add the current BAN 
projects to the long-term borrowing under the same paydown schedule to alleviate unknowns and fix the 
amounts into the debt schedule. This decision accelerated the first paydown by 6 months and funds were 
not budgeted for the early borrowing. 
 
Recommendation: The Finance Committee recommends Article 2 as written. 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 11 =====
All site inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the Millbury Standard Operating 
Procedure for Site Plan Review, Site Inspection, and Enforcement, dated June 2019. 
Inspections and enforcement actions shall be tracked by the developer and/or the Town and be able 
to be furnished to the Board at any time. 
If the system is found to be inadequate by virtue of physical evidence of operational failure, even though it 
was built as called for in the storm water management plan, it shall be corrected by the permittee before the 
performance guarantee is released. If the permittee fails to act, the town of Millbury may use the surety 
bond to complete the work. Examples of inadequacy shall be limited to: errors in the infiltrative capability, 
errors in the maximum groundwater elevation, failure to properly define or construct flow paths, or erosive 
discharges from basins.  
[Bylaws Art. 53, 5-1-2007; Code of Bylaws, § 16-3, § 10.]  
 
Rationale: This article modifies the text of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management regulations in 
the Millbury Municipal Code in order to increase the threshold that triggers the requirement for a project 
to obtain a Stormwater Management Permit. There are several other modifications to address minor 
identified issues with the regulations, including changes to the requirements for plan submittals and abutter 
notification. The intent of this article is to reduce the number of small developments projects that require 
obtaining a Stormwater Management Permit, which is costly and time consuming for property owners, 
developers, and town boards & staff. 
 
Recommendation: The Planning Board recommends Article 5 as written. 
 
Recommendation: The Finance Committee defers its recommendation on Article 5 to the Planning Board. 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 6 (CITIZEN PETITION):  To see if the Town will vote to repeal in its entirety from the Town 
of Millbury Zoning Bylaws,  
Article 1. Administration and Procedure; Section 12.45 Design Standards;  
Subsection (v) Additional Design Standards for Bramanville Village District,  
Article 2. District Regulations, Section 24. Bramanville Village District,  
and Article 2. District Regulations, Section 28. Adaptive Reuse Overlay District,  
or take any other action thereon. (Lead Petitioner Terry Burke Dotson) (Required Vote: Two-Thirds 
Majority) 
 
Recommendation: The Finance Committee defers its recommendation on Article 6 to the Planning Board. 
 
Recommendation: The Planning Board will provide a recommendation on Town Meeting floor. 
 
 
ARTICLE 7(CITIZEN PETITION):  To see if the Town will vote to add to The Town of Millbury 
Zoning Bylaws, Accessory Dwelling Units 42.2, Purpose and Intent, 42.2, the following purpose: 
 
7. To provide for an affordable dwelling unit on this property that is identified and deed restricted as such 
in perpetuity.  
 
or take any other action thereon. (Lead Petitioner Terry Burke Dotson) (Required Vote: Simple Majority) 
 
Recommendation: The Finance Committee defers its recommendation on Article 7 to the Planning Board. 
 
Recommendation: The Planning Board will provide a recommendation on Town Meeting floor. 

===== PAGE 12 =====
ARTICLE 8:  To see if the town will vote to amend the Millbury Zoning Bylaw and Millbury Zoning Map 
as follows, or take any other action thereon. (Planning Board) (Required vote: Simple Majority) 
 
1. By amending the Millbury Zoning Map to add a Multi-Family Overlay District, including the 
parcels listed below, as shown on the map entitled “Proposed Multi-Family Overlay Zoning 
District”, dated October 2024, prepared by Barrett Planning Group, on file with the town’s 
Department of Planning & Development:  
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 16      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 162      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 17      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 201      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 202      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 203      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 204      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 205      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 206      
Assessor's Map 45, Lot 207A  
Assessor's Map 46, Lot 34      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 100      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 101      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 102      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 104      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 106      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 107      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 108      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 109      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 110      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 111      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 112      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 113      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 114      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 115      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 116      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 117      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 118      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 119      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 120      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 121      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 122      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 124      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 125      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 125A  
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 125B    
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 126      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 127      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 129      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 130     
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 131      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 132      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 133      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 134      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 135      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 137      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 138      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 139      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 140      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 141        
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 198      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 198B      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 199      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 201      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 202      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 203      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 206      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 207      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 208      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 210      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 211      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 222      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 224      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 68      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 89      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 91      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 93      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 93A  
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 94      
Assessor's Map 53, Lot 97 /99   
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 120      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 121      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 122      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 123      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 136      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 41      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 90      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 91      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 92      
Assessor's Map 54, Lot 93

===== PAGE 13 =====
2. By amending the Millbury Zoning Bylaws, Article 2. DISTRICT REGULATIONS, by adding a new 
“Section 30. Multi-Family Housing Overlay District” to contain the following text:  
 
Section 30. Multi-family Overlay District  
 
30.1 Purposes  
 
The purpose of the Multi-family Overlay District (MFOD) is to provide for multi-family housing 
development in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, § 3A and the Section 3A Compliance Guidelines of 
the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (HLC), as may be amended from time 
to time. In addition, Section 30 is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
• 
Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and types to provide access to new 
housing for people with a variety of needs, ages, household types, and income levels; 
• 
To increase the supply of housing in Millbury that is permanently available to and 
affordable by low- and moderate-income households; and 
• 
Increase the tax base through private investment in new housing development. 
 
30.2 Applicability 
 
At the option of the Applicant, development of land within the MFOD may be undertaken subject 
to the requirements of this Section 30 or by complying with all applicable requirements of the 
underlying district. Developments proceeding under this Section 30 shall be governed solely by 
the provisions herein and the standards or procedures of the underlying districts shall not apply. 
Where the MFOD authorizes uses not otherwise allowed in the underlying district, the provisions 
of the MFOD shall control. Where the MFOD authorizes uses and dimensional controls not 
otherwise allowed in applicable overlay districts, the provisions of the MFOD shall control. Uses 
and dimensional controls of the MFOD are not subject to any special permit requirements of the 
underlying district or applicable overlay districts.  
 
30.3 Permitted Uses 
 
• 
Multi-family housing. For purposes of this Section 30, “multi-family housing” shall mean 
a building with three or more dwelling units or two or more residential buildings on a lot, 
each with two or more dwelling units. 
• 
Accessory home occupation 
• 
Other accessory residential uses 
 
30.4 Dimensional Regulations 
 
In the Multi-family Overlay District, no lot shall be built upon or changed in size or shape except 
in conformity with the following: 
• 
Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 sq. ft. 
• 
Minimum Lot Frontage: 60 feet 
• 
Maximum Lot Coverage: 30 percent 
• 
Maximum Building Height: 3 stories and 40 feet 
• 
Minimum Open Space: 20 percent 
• 
Minimum Yards 
o Front: 25 feet 
o Side: 10 feet 
o Rear: 10 feet 

===== PAGE 14 =====
• 
Minimum separation between two or more buildings on the same lot: 25 feet 
• 
Maximum Density: 15 dwelling units per acre  
 
30.5. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements  
 
Development in the MFOD shall provide the following minimum off-street parking: 
 
(a) Vehicular Parking: 
• 
One (1) space per studio or one-bedroom unit 
• 
Two (2) spaces per unit for units with two or more bedrooms 
 
(b) Bicycle Parking: For multi-family developments with 10 or more units, there shall be a 
minimum of one covered bicycle storage space per two dwelling units unless waived by 
the Planning Board. 
 
30.6 Inclusionary Housing 
 
Residential development in the MFOD shall provide affordable dwelling units in accordance with 
this Section 30.6.  
 
(a) In any multi-family development under Section 30 resulting in a net increase of ten or 
more dwelling units on any parcel or contiguous parcels comprising a proposed 
development site, at least 10 percent of the dwelling units shall be affordable housing, as 
defined by the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) or its 
successors. Fractions shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 
(b) Developments shall not be segmented to avoid compliance with this Section 30.6. 
Segmentation shall mean one or more divisions of land that cumulatively result in a net 
increase of ten or more lots or dwelling units above the number existing thirty-six months 
earlier on any parcel or set of contiguous parcels held in common ownership on or after 
the effective date of this Section 30. 
(c) All the affordable units required in a proposed development shall be located within the 
development site (“on-site units”).  
(d) All affordable units created under this Section 30 shall be subject to an affordable 
housing restriction approved by the Planning Board, Town Counsel, and EOHLC. The 
restriction shall run with the land in perpetuity and shall be recorded with the Worcester 
County Registry of Deeds or Registry District of the Land Court. All affordable units 
shall meet the criteria for inclusion in EOHLC’s Subsidized Housing Inventory for the 
Town of Millbury. 
(e) Comparability. All on-site affordable housing units shall be dispersed throughout the 
development site and shall be indistinguishable from market-rate units. The number of 
bedrooms in affordable units shall be comparable to the bedroom mix in market-rate units 
in the development. 
(f) The selection of qualified purchasers or qualified renters shall be carried out under an 
Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan (AFHMP) submitted by the applicant and 
approved by the Planning Board. The AFHMP shall comply with the Executive Office of 
Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) Local Initiative Program (LIP) guidelines 
in effect on the date of the MFOD Plan Approval application to the Planning Board. 
 

===== PAGE 15 =====
30.7 MFOD Plan Approval Process 
 
30.71 General 
(a) Development in the MFOD shall be subject to MFOD Plan Approval by the Planning 
Board and shall not be subject to Site Plan Review under Section 12.4 except where 
noted herein.    
(b) No building permit can be issued for the proposed development unless an application for 
MFOD Plan Approval has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of this 
Section 30 and unless the application has been approved by the Planning Board. 
(c) Submission requirements for MFOD Plan Approval shall be in accordance Section 
12.44(a) of this Bylaw and any appliable Planning Board’s Rules and Regulations.  
(d) Development in the MFOD shall adhere to the greatest degree practical to the Design 
Standards in Section 12.45.  
 
30.72. Application Procedures  
(a) The Applicant is encouraged but not required to meet with the Director of Planning 
and Development prior to applying for MFOD Plan Approval. 
(b) A complete application shall be filed with the Town Clerk. To be deemed complete, 
the filing shall include all required forms and submission requirements, including 
fees, in the Planning Board’s Rules and Regulations. A copy of the Application, 
including the date and time of filing and the required number of copies of the 
Application, shall be filed forthwith by the Applicant with the Planning Board.  
(c) Within seven days of receipt of the application by the Planning Board, the Director of 
Planning and Development shall distribute copies of the application to the Building 
Commissioner, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Health Department, Conservation 
Commission, and Department of Public Works.  Any comments from the reviewing 
parties shall be submitted to the Board within 35 days of filing of the Application. 
The Planning Board or its designee shall forward to the Applicant copies of all 
comments and recommendations received to date from other boards, commissions, or 
departments. 
(d) Public Hearing. Within 45 days of receipt of the MFOD Plan Approval Application, 
the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing and review the Application in 
accordance with G.L. c. 40A, § 11. 
(e) No later than 90 days from the date the Application was received by the Town Clerk, 
the Board shall approve the plan where it finds that the proposed development 
addresses the purposes and meets the purposes and requirements of this Section 30, 
considering: 
• 
The proposed placement of buildings;  
• 
Surface and ground water drainage and erosion control;  
• 
Protection against flooding and inundation;  
• 
Prevention of water and pollution and environmental damage;  
• 
Provision for adequate utility services;  
• 
Provisions of off-street parking and loading;  
• 
Location of intersections of driveways and streets;  
• 
The effect of additional traffic created by the development on intersections 
and streets likely to be affected by the proposed development;  
• 
Provision for pedestrian/bicycle accessways connecting to adjacent open 
space, neighborhoods, schools, recreation areas or transportation facilities 
and for alternative transit programs;  
• 
Provisions for landscaping and adequate screening and buffering and 

===== PAGE 16 =====
• 
The submission of a complete MFOD Plan Approval Application. 
(f) The Board may impose reasonable conditions to ensure compliance with the 
requirements of this Section 30 and other applicable sections of the Zoning Bylaw or 
to mitigate any extraordinary adverse impacts of the Development on nearby 
properties, provided that the Board’s conditions do not unduly restrict opportunities 
for housing development by adding unreasonable costs or by unreasonably impairing 
the economic feasibility of a proposed development. The Board shall file its written 
decision with the Town Clerk within 14 days of the Board’s action on the plan. The 
decision shall be by majority vote.  The time limit for public hearings and taking of 
action by the Board may be extended by written agreement between the Applicant 
and the Planning Board. A copy of the agreement shall be filed with the Town Clerk. 
(g) A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner and to the Applicant, if other 
than the owner. A notice of the decision shall be sent to the parties in interest and to 
persons who requested a notice at the public hearing. 
(h) MFOD Development Plan Approval shall remain valid and shall run with the land 
indefinitely provided that construction has commenced within three years after the 
Board issues the decision, excluding time required to adjudicate any appeal from the 
Board’s decision. The time for commencing construction shall also be extended if the 
Applicant is actively pursuing other required permits for the project, or if there is 
good cause for the Applicant’s failure to commence construction, or as may be 
provided in an approval for a multi-phase development under this Section 30. 
 
30.73. Modification of Approved Plans  
(a) Minor Change 
• 
After MFOD Plan Approval, an Applicant may apply to make minor changes 
involving minor utility or building orientation adjustments, or minor adjustments 
to parking or other site details that do not affect the overall buildout of the site, or 
provision of open space, number of housing units, or affordable housing. A 
change of 5 percent or less in the number of housing units in a development shall 
constitute a minor change.  
• 
Minor changes must be submitted to the Planning Board in accordance with the 
Planning Board’s Rules and Regulations and shall include redlined prints of the 
Approved Plan. The Planning Board may authorize the proposed changes at any 
regularly scheduled meeting without the need to hold a public hearing.  
• 
Within 30 days of receipt of the Applicant’s request, the Planning Board shall 
issue a written decision to approve or deny the minor changes and provide a copy 
to the Applicant for filing with the Town Clerk. 
(b) Major Change. Changes deemed by the Planning Board to constitute a major change 
in an approved development because of the nature of the change or because the 
change cannot be appropriately characterized as a minor change under Subsection 
30.73(a) above shall be processed by the Planning Board as a new Application for 
MFOD Plan Approval under Section 30.7. 
 
Rationale: This article establishes the boundaries of the Multi-Family Housing Overlay District (MFOD), which 
includes the majority of the Business-I zoning district and several adjacent parcels in the Residential-I and 
Industrial-I zoning districts. The article also establishes the purpose, applicability, dimensional regulations, and 
approval process for the MFOD. The intent of this new overlay zoning district is to comply with the requirements 
of the 2021 changes to Section 3A of M.G.L. Ch. 40A, the “Zoning Act”. The law defines Millbury as an Adjacent 
MBTA Community with a requirement to have at least one zoning district in which multi-family housing is 
permitted as of right, has a minimum gross density of 15 units per acre, and a total zoned capacity of 750 units, 

===== PAGE 17 =====
among other requirements outlined in guidance by the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities. The 
intent of this article and zoning change is to keep Millbury in compliance with Section 3A.  
 
Recommendation: The Planning Board recommends Article 8 as written. 
 
Recommendation: The Finance Committee defers its recommendation on Article 8 to the Planning Board. 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 18 =====
Åõ
122A
Canal S
t
reet
Grafton
Street
Howe Avenue
North M
ain Street
Provi
d
ence Stre
et
Elm Str
eet
Riv
e
rlin Street
Coral
Street
South Main Street
Ha
milton
Street
Jacki
e Drive
Harris Place
Grove Street
Park
Street
Canal
Court
River
Street
Miles Stree
t
Maple Street
Railroad
Court
Sycamore Street
School
Street
West Street
Pearl St
reet
Waters Street
Walling Avenue
Mayfair Drive
Su
mmer Street
Curv
e Str
eet
E
lm
Court
Willia
m
Street
Ch
urch Street
Cherry Street
Atwood Avenue
¯
0
0.1
0.05
Miles
Date: October 2024
Source: Town of Millbury,
MassGIS, MassDOT, and EOHLC.
Legend
Proposed MHOD
Tax Parcels
MassDOT Major Roads
Interstate
U.S. Highway
State Route
Non-numbered
Road
Local Roads
Water
Wetland
Information depicted on this map is for
general planning purposes only. This
information is not adequate for legal
boundary definition, regulatory
interpretation, or parcel-level analysis.
Use caution when interpreting the
information on this map.
Town of Millbury
Proposed Multi-Family
Housing Overlay Zoning
District
GRAFTON
WORCESTER
OXFORD
SUTTON
AUBURN
