
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 1 To see if the Town will vote to amend Chapter 275 of the General Bylaws, known as the 
Zoning Bylaw, by adding the following Section  275-3.23 MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay 
District and to amend the Zoning Map to include the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay 
District, including the following subdistricts: Eliot Street Corridor Subdistrict, Milton/Central Avenue 
Station Subdistrict, Mattapan Station Subdistrict, Blue Hills Parkway Subdistrict, Granite Avenue 
Subdistrict, and East Milton Square Subdistrict as shown on the MBTA Communities Multi-family 
Overlay District Boundary Map. 
Section 275-3.23 MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District 
A. 
Purpose 
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multi- 
family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General 
Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as of right multi-family housing to accomplish the 
following purposes: 
1. Meet local housing needs along the full range of incomes, promoting social and economic 
diversity and the stability of individuals and families living in Milton. 
2. Ensure that new multi-family housing creation is harmonious with the existing 
community. 
3. Provide a wide range of housing alternatives to meet Milton’s diverse housing needs. 
4. Promote smart growth development by siting multi-family housing adjacent to transit or in 
areas where existing commercial and civic amenities and infrastructure already exist. 
5. Increase the municipal tax base through private investment in new residential 
development. 
 
B. Establishment and Applicability 
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 158 acres in size that is 
superimposed over the underlying zoning district (s) and is shown on the Zoning Map. 
1. Applicability of MCMOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing located 
within a MCMOD in accordance with the provisions of this Section 275-3.23. 
2. Underlying Zoning. The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying 
zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the 
Zoning Bylaw governing the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full 
force, except for uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the MCMOD. Uses that 
are not identified in Section 275-3.23 are governed by the requirements of the underlying 
zoning district(s). 
3. Sub-districts. The MCMOD contains the following sub-districts, all of which are 
shown on the MCMOD Boundary Map: Eliot Street Corridor Subdistrict, 
Milton/Central Avenue Station Subdistrict, Mattapan Station Subdistrict, Granite 
Avenue Subdistrict, East Milton Square Subdistrict, and Blue Hills Parkway 
Corridor Subdistrict. 
9

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Definitions. 
For purposes of this Section 275-3.23, the following definitions shall apply. 
1. Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded 
in its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or 
household of a specified income, or both. 
2. Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this 
Section 275-3.23. 
3. Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site 
Plan Review, or Special Permit. 
4. Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan statistical 
region that includes the Town of Milton, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD). 
5. As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of 
application without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, 
waiver, or other discretionary zoning approval. 
6. Building coverage. The maximum area of the lot that can be attributed to the 
footprint of the buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building Coverage 
does not include surface parking. 
7. Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time. 
8. DHCD. The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development, or 
any successor agency. 
9. Design Guidelines. Design Standards made applicable to all rehabilitation, 
redevelopment, or new construction within the MCMOD. 
10. Development standards. Provisions of Section 275-3.23 J. General 
Development Standards made applicable to projects within the MCMOD. 
11. EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities, 
DHCD’s successor agency. 
12. Floor Area Ratio (FAR).  A measurement derived by dividing the total building area by 
the total lot area. 
13. Height, Feet. Height shall be measured to the midpoint of the slope of a pitched roof, or the 
parapet of a flat roof, excluding the items specifically defined as allowable projections 
herein, from the average mean grade of the natural ground contiguous to the building.  
14. Height, Stories. “Stories,” as used in this section, shall not include a basement so long as 
the finished floor height of the first story is no more than four (4) feet above the average 
mean grade of the natural ground contiguous to the building. 
15. Lot. An area of land with definite boundaries that is used or available for use as the site of a 
building or buildings. 
16. MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
17. Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of multi-family residential uses 
10

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
and non- residential uses, including, commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses. 
18. Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or 
more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each 
building. 
19. Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay 
district, in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right. 
20. Open space. For the purposes of this subsection, open space shall mean a portion of a lot 
or of adjacent lots in common ownership exclusive of any building or buildings and/or 
their associated driveways and parking areas and shall include parks, lawns, gardens, 
landscaped areas, community gardens, terraces, patios, areas left in their natural condition, 
athletic fields, open air athletic courts, playgrounds, open air swimming pools, and any 
open vegetated areas. Driveways and parking areas permanent or temporary, shall not be 
counted as open space. 
21. Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple 
stories; a vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or 
a vehicle parking area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has 
a parking surface at least eight feet below grade. Structured Parking does not include 
surface parking or carports, including solar carports. 
22. Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. 
A solar panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a 
built structure for the purposes of this definition. 
23. Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living 
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, 
sleeping, eating, cooking. and sanitation. 
24. Rooftop Terrace. A roofless, raised platform on the roof of a building that 
provides community gathering space, such as a deck, terrace, community garden, 
or other outdoor amenities. 
25. Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
26. Site plan review authority. The Planning Board is the site plan review authority. 
27. Subdistrict. An area within the MCMOD that is geographically smaller than the 
MCMOD district and differentiated from the rest of the district by use, dimensional 
standards, or development standards. 
28. Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units 
maintained by EOHLC used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate- 
income housing for the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit 
Law. 
29. Transit station. An MBTA subway station, commuter rail station, or ferry terminal. 
a. Commuter rail station. Any MBTA commuter rail station with year-round, rather 
than intermittent, seasonal, or event-based, service. 
b. Ferry terminal. The location where passengers embark and disembark from 
regular, year-round MBTA ferry service. 
11

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
c. Subway station. Any of the stops along the MBTA Red Line, Green Line, Orange 
Line, or Blue Line. 
 
D. Eliot Street Corridor Subdistrict 
1. Purpose 
The purpose of the Eliot Street Corridor Subdistrict is to provide opportunities for 
lower density, high quality multi-family housing that helps preserve the existing 
physical context of the one- and two-unit neighborhoods directly adjacent to the 
Mattapan Trolley line.  
2. Applicability 
An applicant may develop multifamily housing on certain parcels within a half mile of 
Mattapan, Capen Street, Valley Road, Central Avenue, and Milton stations, in 
accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
3. Uses Permitted As of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the 
Eliot Street Corridor Subdistrict. 
a. Multi-family housing of up to three (3) units in a single building per lot on parcels 7,500 
square feet or more. 
4. Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to any of the 
permitted uses in Section D.3. 
a. Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as a garage 
or other building on the same lot as the principal use. 
5. Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this 
Zoning, the dimensional requirements applicable in the Eliot Street Corridor Subdistrict 
are as follows: 
 
Standard 
Lot Size 
Minimum (SF) 
7,500  
Height 
Stories (Maximum) 
2.5 
Feet (Maximum) 
35 
Minimum Open Space 
40% 
Maximum Units per Lot 
3 on lots 7,500 sf or more 
 
 
 
Standard 
Minimum Frontage (ft) 
50 
Front Yard Setback 
(ft.) 
15 
12

===== PAGE 29 =====
0WFSMBZ%JTUSJDU#PVOEBSZ.BQ
37

===== PAGE 30 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMENT: In January 2021, the Massachusetts Legislature adopted an Economic Development 
Bond Bill (H.5250) that requires each municipality in the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority 
(MBTA) service area to zone for multi-family housing as of right. Further, the law authorized the 
Executive Office of Housing & Livable Communities (EOHLC) to develop implementation guidelines 
for these municipalities (MBTA Communities).  
On August 10, 2022, the EOHLC issued Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act (the “Guidelines”). They were revised on October 21, 2022, and 
again on August 17, 2023. The Guidelines require Towns that the EOHLC has designated as a “rapid 
transit community” to submit zoning that is in accord with the Guidelines to the EOHLC by December 
31, 2023. According to the EOHLC, Milton is a rapid transit community, and the Guidelines therefore 
gave the Town approximately 16 months to zone for a 25% increase in total housing units, the most 
comprehensive zoning that the Town has contemplated in almost 100 years. 
Since the Guidelines were released, the Planning Board and the Department of Planning and 
Community Development worked closely to develop zoning that complies with this new law. The 
Planning Board hired consultants: Utile to perform compliance modeling of districts, and RKG to 
perform a fiscal impact analysis. Unfortunately, given the timeline, the Planning Board received its first 
modeling of districts from Utile in June 2023 and, at the time of the drafting of this Warrant, has not yet 
received a final report from RKG with regard to fiscal impact for the Town.  
In anticipation of this Special Town Meeting, the Select Board put forward this Article with regard to 
MBTA Communities Zoning as of right based upon the work performed to date by the Planning Board 
and the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
The Planning Board does not support the Select Board’s Article and is seeking additional time to 
prepare their own zoning Article. The Warrant Committee recommends that the Planning Board be 
given the time it is asking for in order to draft its own zoning Article that is both compliant with the new 
law and zoning with which the Planning Board is comfortable. 
Areas of concerns with the Select Board’s Article that have been voiced by several members of the 
Warrant Committee and in part echoed by some members of the Planning Board include: the 
disproportionate burden placed upon the residents of Granite Ave. and East Milton, lack of new units 
within ½ mile of the Eliot Street Corridor, that the fiscal cost to the Town has not been established 
(school budget, services such as fire and police and the capital needs associated with those functions, 
and significant infrastructure upgrades necessary for water, sewer, and public ways), and the effect on 
traffic and parking. 
Work that the Planning Board would like additional time to perform includes: to further refine and 
improve the district model specifically with regard to East Milton Square and the Eliot Street Corridor, 
to further refine and improve design standards and guidelines and site plan approval, to perform an 
economic feasibility study for the purpose of increasing the percentage of affordability in new multi-
family housing and to obtain a buildout analysis to provide a visual aid to residents and developers. On 
September 18, 2023, the Planning Board formally requested an extension for more time of the EOHLC 
and as of the writing of this Article comment they have not received a response. 
To those ends, the Planning Board has set a goal for itself to have an Article ready for the Annual Town 
Meeting in May 2024. We therefore suggest to Town Meeting that the Planning Board be allowed to 
38

===== PAGE 31 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
complete their work and further collaborate with the Select Board to do what is in the best interest of 
Milton. 
Of note, the Commonwealth has established penalties for non-compliance with the MBTA Communities 
statute. It is unclear, however, as to what form this legal action might actually take – the Office of the 
Attorney General has advised that communities that fail to comply with the state mandate may be subject 
to “civil enforcement action,” be subject to the administrative consequence of being rendered ineligible 
to receive certain forms of state funding, and risk liability under federal and state fair housing law. 
Because litigation is a lengthy and expensive process for all parties, it is the hope of the Warrant 
Committee that a compliant Planning Board Article enacted by the citizens of the Town at the Annual 
Town Meeting would mitigate, if not remove, the threats that the Commonwealth is making. 
 
 
39

===== PAGE 32 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 2 To see if the Town will vote to amend Chapter 275 of the General Bylaws, known as the 
Zoning Bylaw, by changing the following subsections of Section 275-3.23E. Milton/Central Avenue 
Station Subdistrict of Section 275-3.23: MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District. 
 
2. Applicability 
An applicant may develop mixed-use buildings up to 6 stories on certain large parcels 
in the area labeled East on the MCMOD Boundary Map, and up to 4.5 stories on certain 
large parcels in the area labeled West on the MCMOD Boundary Map, in accordance 
with the provisions of this subsection. An applicant may develop multi-family or mixed-
use buildings up to 4.5 stories in the area labeled Bridge on the MCMOD Boundary 
Map, in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Developments in the East and 
West areas of the Milton/Central Avenue Station Subdistrict require a multi-family 
component and a ground-floor non-residential component.  
 
3. Uses Permitted As of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the 
Milton/Central Station Subdistrict. 
a. Multi-family housing. 
b. Mixed-use development. As of right uses in a mixed-use development are as 
follows: 
 
Ground Floor (required component in East and West areas) 
Community space. 
Educational uses. 
Personal services. 
Retail. 
Experiential retail, including retail associated with dance or exercise studios, 
music studios, photography studios, or other combination of education, 
services, and retail. 
Restaurant, café, and other eating establishments without a drive-through. 
Office, professional office, medical and dental offices, and co-working space 
Artists’ studios, maker space, and small-scale food production [no more than
5,000 SF], and retail associated with each use. 
Any Floor 
Residential (required component). 
 
i. 
Non-residential use shall not exceed a maximum of 33 percent of the total 
area of a building or lot. 
ii. 
Non-residential uses shall be required in at least half of the ground floor of 
the building, provided the non-residential use does not exceed 33 percent of 
the total area of the building or lot. The ground floor may also include 
separate entrances for upper level uses, common areas, or lobbies. 
40

===== PAGE 33 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Number of parking spaces. The following numbers of off-street parking spaces shall be 
permitted by use, either in surface parking or within garages or other structures: 
 
Use 
Maximum Spaces 
Multi-family 
1 space per Residential Dwelling Unit 
 
Minimum Spaces 
Non-residential component in 
a mixed-use development 
No minimum 
 
And to authorize the Town Clerk to make clerical revisions to section numbers and headings.  
And to act on anything relating thereto.  
Submitted by the Select Board  
RECOMMENDED that if the Town votes, pursuant to Article 1 of this Warrant, to amend the 
Zoning Bylaw and Zoning Map Amendment for Compliance with M.G.L. c. 40A §3A Multi-family 
zoning as-of-right in MBTA Communities, that the Town then vote, under Article 2, to amend 
Chapter 275 of the General Bylaws, known as the Zoning Bylaw, by changing the following 
subsections of Section 275-3.23E. Milton/Central Avenue Station Subdistrict of Section 275-3.23: 
MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District. 
 
3. Applicability 
An applicant may develop mixed-use buildings up to 6 stories on certain large 
parcels in the area labeled East on the MCMOD Boundary Map, and up to 4.5 
stories on certain large parcels in the area labeled West on the MCMOD Boundary 
Map, in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. An applicant may 
develop multi-family or mixed-use buildings up to 4.5 stories in the area labeled 
Bridge on the MCMOD Boundary Map, in accordance with the provisions of this 
subsection. Developments in the East and West areas of the Milton/Central Avenue 
Station Subdistrict require a multi-family component and a ground-floor non-
residential component.  
 
4. Uses Permitted As of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the 
Milton/Central Station Subdistrict. 
c. Multi-family housing. 
d. Mixed-use development. As of right uses in a mixed-use development are as 
follows: 
 
Ground Floor (required component in East and West areas) 
Community space. 
Educational uses. 
Personal services. 
41

===== PAGE 34 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retail. 
Experiential retail, including retail associated with dance or exercise 
studios, music studios, photography studios, or other combination of 
education, services, and retail. 
Restaurant, café, and other eating establishments without a drive-through. 
Office, professional office, medical and dental offices, and co-working space
Artists’ studios, maker space, and small-scale food production [no more
than 5,000 SF], and retail associated with each use. 
Any Floor 
Residential (required component). 
 
iii. 
Non-residential use shall not exceed a maximum of 33 percent of the 
total area of a building or lot. 
iv. 
Non-residential uses shall be required in at least half of the ground floor 
of the building, provided the non-residential use does not exceed 33 
percent of the total area of the building or lot. The ground floor may 
also include separate entrances for upper level uses, common areas, or 
lobbies. 
 
10. Number of parking spaces. The following numbers of off-street parking spaces shall 
be permitted by use, either in surface parking or within garages or other structures: 
 
Use 
Maximum Spaces 
Multi-family 
1 space per Residential Dwelling Unit 
 
Minimum Spaces 
Non-residential component 
in a mixed-use development 
No minimum 
 
And to authorize the Town Clerk to make clerical revisions to section numbers and headings.  
COMMENT: The Warrant Committee voted to recommend requiring mixed use in the Milton/Central 
Station Subdistrict only in such case and conditioned upon Town Meeting first voting “yes” to approve 
Article 1 of the 2023 Special Town Meeting Warrant.  As stated above, that article would approve a 
Zoning Bylaw Amendment for Compliance with M.G.L. c.40A §3A Multi-family zoning as-of-right in 
MBTA Communities. The Warrant Committee recommends that Town Meeting vote to refer Article 1 
back to the Select Board for further study, but in the case that the Town does vote “yes”, the Warrant 
Committee would recommend that the Town zone for a requirement of mixed use in the Milton/Central 
Station Subdistrict in order to preserve and expand the Town’s commercial property base of which there 
is comparatively (to the residential property base) little and a pressing need for more. 
42
