
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 26, 2023  5:03 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Needham
1.2. Community Category
Commuter rail community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
1784
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
Yes
1.5a. Please list MBTA commuter rail
stations that are located within the
municipal boundaries
MBTA Station at Needham Center, MBTA Station at Needham Heights,
MBTA Station at Needham Junction, and MBTA Station at Hersey.
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Lee Newman
1.7a. Title
Director of Planning and Community Development
1.7b. Email Address
lnewman@needhamma.gov

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.7c. Phone Number
(781) 455-7550 ext. 270
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Kate Fitzpatrick
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
Needham Town Hall
1471 Highland Avenue
Needham, MA 02492
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
kfitzpatrick@needhamma.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
On the municipal staff side key members participating are: Kate Fitzpatrick,
Town Manager, Katie King, Assistant Town Manager, Lee Newman,
Director of Planning and Community Development, and Karen Sunnarborg,
Housing Specialist.
On the Town Board side both the Planning Board and Select Board will be
actively involved.  Participating from the Planning Board are: Adam Block,
Jeanne McKnight, Paul Alpert, Artie Crocker, and Natasha Espada.
Participating from the Select Board are: Marianne Cooley, Nelson Marcus,
Matthew Borrelli, Kevin Klein and Heidi Frail.
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
In October 2022, the Needham Planning Board appointed a working group
of representatives of local boards and committees as well as three citizens
at large to prepare a Housing Plan.  The Plan was completed in December
2023. Since the last housing plan was approved in 2007, the Town had
made considerable progress in producing affordable housing by adding 894
new units to its Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI) and surpassing the
state affordability goal of 10%.  Despite reaching the 10% threshold, the
Town recognized that significant unmet housing needs remained in the
community, particularly in the context of unprecedented housing prices.  
In addition to progress in producing affordable housing, the Town also
adopted a number of zoning bylaws to better promote affordable housing
and smart growth development.  Notable among these changes was the
introduction of Overlay Districts in several commercial areas of town
including Needham Center, the Lower Chestnut and Garden Street areas,
and Mixed Use Overlay District (MUOD) in the Highland Avenue/Route 128
area.  Needham also established an Elder Services District off of Gould
Street to serve the community's increasingly aging population. Most of
these Districts require the integration of affordable housing equivalent to
one unit for properties of less than ten units and 10% of all units for those
with ten or more units.  The more recent MUOD, Highland Avenue/128
District, and Neighborhood Business District/128 zoning increased the
affordability requirement to 12.5% of all units.
The focus of the recently-completed Housing Plan was to analyze updated
information on demographic, economic and housing conditions, identify
priority needs, and recommend actions to address these needs, also
integrating substantial opportunities for community input.  The Housing
Plan includes 17 major actions and 8 additional recommendations for
further study to better promote housing affordability and diversity in the
community. Chief among these proposed strategies is compliance with
MBTA Communities Guidelines under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as well
as other zoning-related recommendations such as better promoting
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs), adopting Town-wide inclusionary zoning,
 and better controlling teardown activity for example.  Other key
recommendations included support for the Needham Housing Authority's
Preservation and Redevelopment Initiative (PRI) to upgrade its aging and
antiquated properties with the prospect of expanding the number of units as
well.  Additionally, the Plan recommended actions to better integrate
greater energy efficiencies in housing and build local and regional support
and collaboration for housing production and preservation initiatives. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
In addition to making ongoing progress in complying with state MBTA
Communities Guidelines under Section 3A,  the      Town is already
involved in the implementation of a few of the proposed strategies included
in the Housing Plan including amendments to the Accessory Dwelling Unit
bylaw. Presently, the Planning Board is preparing an amended Accessory
Dwelling Unit (ADU) bylaw, to eliminate the requirement of occupancy by
family members and caregivers and enable owners to obtain additional
income, among other benefits, which is particularly helpful to older owners
on fixed incomes.  Approval of ADUs within single-family units will be
changed from special permit to by-right, however, some units in detached
structures may be allowed under special permit.  The Planning Board plans
to have the new zoning in place for the Annual Town Meeting in 2023.
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
a. An existing zoning district or districts that might already comply with the
Section 3A Guidelines
b. An existing zoning district or districts that must be amended to comply
with the Section 3A Guidelines

===== PAGE 5 =====
3.1a. Please identify and briefly describe
the possibly-compliant district(s),
including any characteristics of existing
development or transit options that
make it suitable for use as this
community's 3A-compliant district.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents.
As calculated by DHCD, at least 90% of Needham's zoning districts must
be located within ½ mile of transit based on its total developable area of
1,223 acres near transit stations. This translates into Needham's
multi-family zoning districts including at least 108 acres at a density of at
least 15 units/acre, which would allow for 1,606 units within ½ mile of a
commuter rail station. The additional 178 units that Needham must zone for
(minimum multi-family unit capacity of 1,784 units minus 1,606) could be in
areas outside of the ½ mile limit.
Needham has one zoning district that permits multi-family housing
as-of-right within ½ mile of transit at the minimum DHCD required density
standard of 15 units per acre; that is the A-1 Apartment zoning district
where the multi-family density standard is set at 18 units per acre.  The
major dimensional requirements of Apartment A-1 zones include:
?	Minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet.
?	Minimum frontage of 120 feet.
?	Maximum dwelling units per acre of 18 units.
?	Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.5, meaning on a 20,000 square foot
lot the maximum square footage that can be built is 10,000 square feet.
?	Minimum setback (front/side/rear) of 20/20/20 feet.
?	Maximum height of 3 stories or 40 feet.
Needham has three A-1 Apartment districts, namely, Rosemary Lake
Apartments and Rosemary Ridge Condominiums (14 acres), the Highlands
(4 acres) and Hamilton Highlands (4 acres) within ½ mile of transit for a
total of 22 acres.  Two of these districts if left as independent entities would
fall below the 5-acre minimum land area requirement found in the  DHCD
regulations and would need to be adjusted.  The multi-family build-out
density for the 22 acres located in the A-1 Apartment district totals 396
dwelling units. A map showing the ½ mile radius distance around each of
Needham's commuter rail stations and the zoning districts located within
those radii (including the A-1 District) is attached.
As noted above, DHCD guidelines also allow portions of the multi-family
district to be located further away from transit, "provided that such areas
are easily accessible to the transit station based on existing street patterns
and pedestrian connections".  Within this category is the A-1 Apartment
district located at 31 Hamlin Lane, where the as-of-right multi-family density
standard is set at 18 units per acre.  This district comprises the Hamlin
Condominium development which contains 6 acres of land with an
associated multi-family build-out of 108 units.  
In summary, 28 acres of land are currently zoned within the A-1 District
with an as-of-right multi-family density standard of 18 units per acre for a
total of 504 units leaving an unmet requirement of 1,380 units (minimum
multi-family unit capacity of 1,784 units minus 504).

===== PAGE 6 =====
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14072093829
3.1b. Please select the changes that
may be necessary for the existing
district to comply. Optional: Attach any
supporting documents that describe
this district.
District boundaries
Use schedule
Dimensional regulations
Parking requirements

===== PAGE 7 =====
Explanation:
The Needham Housing Plan completed in December of 2022 detailed a
group of recommended zoning strategies to achieve compliance with the
MBTA Communities Act under Section 3A.  It is these recommended
strategies as detailed in the Housing Plan which the Town will be pursuing.
These recommendations involve rezoning some areas currently zoned for
single-family or 2-family residence to Apartment A-1, changing zoning to
A-1 provisions in business areas that already allow multi-family housing as
well as introducing this use in some business and industrial districts that do
not currently permit multi-family residential uses. The major dimensional
requirements of Apartment A-1 zones include:
?	Minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet.
?	Minimum frontage of 120 feet.
?	Maximum dwelling units per acre of 18 units.
?	Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.5, meaning on a 20,000 square foot
lot the maximum square footage that can be built is 10,000 square feet.
?	Minimum setback (front/side/rear) of 20/20/20 feet.
?	Maximum height of 3 stories or 40 feet.
The recommendations for rezoning are focused largely in the areas along
the Highland Avenue to Chestnut Street corridor that are not only near
transit but also where higher density development already exists. 
Recommendations for specific zoning by-law changes under consideration
are listed below.  Further study will be required to confirm that the final
dimensional limits controlling district density will be able to deliver the gross
density (units/acre) required by 3A Guidelines.  (Please see attached file
which contains annotated zoning maps from the Town's Housing Plan for
further review of the proposed zoning changes):
Needham Heights District (Group 1):
Implement Apartment A-1 zoning in certain areas now zoned SRB, or GR,
including locations of non-conforming existing multi-family (MF) uses.  
Apartment A-1 - rezone parcels within ½ mile of Needham Heights station,
now zoned SRB: 
1a.	From Hamilton Highlands (Apartment A-1) along Highland Avenue
south to Hunnewell Street;
1b.	Avery Park Condominium and farther south along Highland Avenue to
Hunnewell Street and including the Methodist Church at Hunnewell and
Highland;
1c.	Extend existing Apartment A-1 zoning across Hillside Avenue and along
the northerly side of Rosemary Street adjacent to the Industrial District and
up to the MBTA right-of-way (see item 1g. below) and beyond the ROW to
Highland Avenue to include Needham Library (see item 1g. below and
Christ Episcopal Church ( see item 1J. and 6b. below);

===== PAGE 8 =====
Apartment A-1 - rezone parcels within ½ mile of Needham Heights station,
now zoned GR:
1d.	Convert Hillside School and the rear portions of 5 lots of the Industrial
district on Crescent Road that abut the Hillside School to Apartment A-1;
1e.	Convert Brookline Rug parcel to Apartment A-1, but the current use
may remain as a prior non-conforming use.  It has connection to both
Hunnewell and Crescent Road and can be part of a consolidated MF
district with the rest of new Apartment A-1 and the Industrial District that is
to be rezoned to allow MF by-right as a use (see item 1f. below);
Amend current Industrial Districts within ½ mile of Needham Heights transit
station to allow MF as an additional allowed use with Apartment A-1
dimensional limits with a minimum 10,000 sf lot size.
1f.	Add Multi-family housing, at A-1 dimensions, to the uses allowed by
right in the Industrial District along Crescent Road;
1g.	Add Multi-family housing, at A-1 dimensions, to the uses allowed by
right in the Industrial District between Hillside Avenue and the MBTA
right-of-way and between West and Rosemary Streets;
Amend current Hillside Avenue Business District within ½ mile of transit
station to allow MF by-right and use 
Apartment A-1 dimensional limits with a minimum 10,000 sf lot size.  Allow
mixed-use option by Special Permit.
1h.	Hillside Avenue Business from both sides of the Hunnewell intersection
south to the south side of West Street;
Amend current Avery Square Business District within 1/2 mile of transit
station.  Adjust/increase current height and 
story limits where noted.  Changes to limits are to be appropriate to their
immediate context within their district.  
1i.	Avery Square Business - increase height from 35 ft. to 38 ft. for
mixed-use MF allowed by special permit;
Expand General Residence over SRB area along the Highland Avenue
corridor to allow 2-family and SF conversions to 2-family.
1j.	Both sides of Highland Avenue from Rosemary Street to Avery Square
Business District (but see item 1c. above and 6B. below related to rezoning
Christ Church to Apartment A-1).
Needham Center District (Group 2):
Amend and extend current Business District within ½ mile of transit to allow
MF by-right and use Apartment A-1 dimensional limits with a minimum
10,000 sf lot size.  Allow, by special permit, mixed-use MF to 48 ft. & 4

===== PAGE 9 =====
stories with 4th floor setback.
2a.	Extend Business District north to Rosemary Street to include portion of
Sudbury Farms parcel now zoned SRB; 
2b.	Business District along Highland Avenue from May Street north to
Rosemary Street to include all of Sudbury Farms parcel;  
Implement Apartment A-1 zoning in certain areas now zoned SRB, GR or
Industrial or in locations of non-conforming existing multi-family (MF) uses. 
Apartment A-1 - rezone parcels within ½ mile of Needham Center station,
now zoned SRB:
2c.	St. Joseph School strip along May Street;
2d.	Stephen Palmer former school leased by Town for multi-family housing;
2f.	YMCA site on Great Plain Avenue next to Greene's Field;
2g.	888 Great Plain Avenue (former nursery/garden center);
2h.	Baptist and Christian Science Church parcels on Great Plain Avenue,
near corner of Warren Street;
Apartment A-1 - rezone parcels within ½ mile of Needham Center station,
now zoned GR:                
2e.	Lots on Pickering Place together with a portion of St. Joseph School
parcel;
2i.	Consolidate a portion of the Denmark Lane MF housing south of the
Needham Center Overlay District, currently zoned GR, and combine it with
the small Industrial district along the MBTA right-of-way proposed for
rezoning to 
Apartment A-1 that is also part of the Denmark Lane MF project area (see
item 2j. below); 
Apartment A-1 - rezone parcels within ½ mile of Needham Center station,
now zoned Industrial:                
2j.	Convert the small Industrial district along the MBTA right-of-way to be
combined with the front portion of the parcel being rezoned from GR (see
item 2i. above) that is also part of the Denmark Lane housing project area. 
Amend current Center Business and Overlay District B and Garden Street
Overlay District within ½ mile of transit. Adjust/increase current height and
story limits where noted.  Changes to limits are to be appropriate to their
immediate context within their district.                 
2k.	Increase height limits in Needham Center Overlay District B for
mixed-use MF to 48 ft. & 4 stories with 4th floor setback. No stand-alone
MF is allowed in the district;               
2m.	Rezone Garden Street Overlay District by changing stand-alone MF to

===== PAGE 10 =====
be allowed by right, rather than special permit, using the existing
dimensional limits.  
Needham Junction District Group 3):
Amend current Chestnut Street Business District and Lower Chestnut
Street Overlay District within ½ mile of transit to allow stand-alone MF
by-right, and mixed-use with MF by special permit.  Adjust/increase current
height and story limits where noted.  Changes to limits are to be
appropriate to their immediate context within their district.  
3a.	Chestnut Street Business and Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District
changed to allow stand-alone MF using Apartment A-1 dimensional limits
with a minimum 10,000 sf lot size, with 4-story/48 ft. limits allowed by
special permit for mixed-use MF in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay
District;
3b.	Extend Chestnut Street Business and Lower Chestnut Street Overlay
Districts to include Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) property on Lincoln Street;
Implement Apartment A-1 zoning in certain areas now zoned SRB, or
Chestnut Street Business Districts or in locations of non-conforming
existing non single-family (SF) uses.  Use Apartment A-1 dimensional
limits.
Apartment A-1 - rezone parcels within ½ mile of Needham Junction station,
now zoned Chestnut Street Business, Lower Chestnut Street Overlay
District and SRB:
3c.	Rezone the Hartney Greymont site (now partly Chestnut Street
Business/Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District and partly SRB) to be
Apartment A-1 to allow MF without allowing mixed-use, with the current use
allowed to remain as a prior non-conforming use.  
Zoning changes will also reconsider parking ratios for mixed-use and
multi-family projects within the overlay districts that are also within ½ mile
of transit stations.  These changes will be informed by the Parking Study
that has been commissioned by the Select Board and is being conducted
by Stantec as well as the parking study that is being conducted by the
WestMetro HOME Consortium in cooperation with MAPC.
As Needham's site plan review process is currently based on major site
plan review/special permit projects, the Town will further revisit these
standards to determine appropriate changes given the relevancy of site
plan review to projects that will be a result of Section 3A rezoning.

===== PAGE 11 =====
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14072093832

===== PAGE 12 =====
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
The non-housing goals important to the Town of Needham in the
implementation of a 3A zoning district are detailed below.  The Town's
desired development outcome from implementation of a 3A district are as
follows:
•	A "complete" mixed-use neighborhood that is economically and socially
sustainable- providing quality jobs, diverse housing opportunities, and a
complementary mix of retail, dining, entertainment, and office uses.
•	A public realm comprised of a safe and attractive system of streets,
plazas, and park spaces that supports an active pedestrian environment
and provides an attractive physical framework that seamlessly integrates a
diverse array of existing and future buildings. 
•	 An attractive, well-designed private realm that mixes new and old
buildings in a compact pattern and scale of development that creates a
well-defined, human-scale public environment and supports a dynamic mix
of retail and complementary uses. 
•	A multi-pronged approach to sustainability that integrates land use,
mobility, and design strategies to minimize environmental impact, reduce
resource consumption, and prolong economic and social cohesiveness and
viability, including policies that: promote compact mixed use development
that creates more local jobs and housing within close walking distance;
prioritize the creation of a retail district that will reduce residents' need to
travel to other communities to meet their shopping needs, thereby reducing
greenhouse gas emissions for local trips; and encourage transit and
alternate modes of travel that reduce miles traveled via personal vehicle for
those traveling from areas outside the local area to visit shopping
destinations. In addition, guidelines and development standards for the
district that promote green development strategies for new buildings,
"green streets" and low-impact development for public infrastructure, and
the reuse of existing buildings that will reduce the consumption of energy.
•	A balanced and complete circulation network that accommodates the
internal and external transportation needs of the area by promoting
walking, biking, and transit while continuing to serve automobile traffic. 
•	Quality pedestrian facilities and amenities that create a safe and
aesthetically pleasing environment that encourages walking and
accommodates increased pedestrian activity.
•	A bicycle network with safe and efficient connections to major destinations
within the district and throughout the Town of Needham.
•	 Efficient but managed vehicle access in the district.
•	Enhanced efficiency and effectiveness of transit in the district. 

===== PAGE 13 =====
•	A well-managed parking supply that supports district businesses and
stimulates economic growth, while not promoting excessive driving.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Sep 30, 2023
Short Answer
Send proposed zoning to DHCD for review (90-day review period), ideally
before hearing needs to be noticed.
Sep 01, 2023
Oct 31, 2023
Short Answer
Advertise zoning. Hold Planning Board hearings. 
Jan 01, 2024
Feb 29, 2024
Short Answer
 Town Meeting Sessions to Adopt Zoning.
May 01, 2024
Oct 31, 2024
Short Answer
 Submit District Compliance Model.
Nov 01, 2024
Dec 31, 2024

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
Needham Housing Plan 
 
Page 183 
 
Appendix 7.1 
 
Needham Zoning Maps with Proposed Zoning Changes 
(Maps focused on MBTA Station Neighborhoods) 
 
The following Needham Zoning maps have been created to graphically represent the proposed zoning 
map changes described in the zoning lists on pages 36-38 as part of complying with MBTA Communities 
Guidelines.  The new maps show that the majority of the zoning reform is concentrated in the Needham 
neighborhoods geographically located near three of the MBTA transit stations that are part of the 
Chestnut Street / Highland Avenue north / south corridor. This zone, or “spine”, includes the more densely 
built parts of town with a mix of commercial, institutional, municipal and residential uses with a range of 
lower to higher density buildings types.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
Needham Housing Plan 
 
Page 184 
 
 

===== PAGE 22 =====
 
Needham Housing Plan 
 
Page 189 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 23 =====
T
T
T
T
HI
GHL
AND AVE
WEST
ST
GREAT PLAIN AVE
CHESTNUT ST
DEDHAM AVE
CE
NT
R
AL
AVE
HIGHLAND AVE
Needham
Junction
Hersey
Needham
Center
Needham
Heights
T
Commuter Rail Stations
Interstate Highways
Highway Ramps
Major Roads
Minor Roads
MBTA Bus Route
Railroads
Town Boundaries
Waterbodies
1/2 Mile From
Commuter Rail Station
Zoning
Apartment A-1
Avery Square Business
Center Business
Business
Chestnut Street Business
Elder Services
General Residence
Hillside Avenue Business
Industrial
Neighborhood Business
Rural Residence Conservation
Single Residence A
Single Residence B
Use Districts Within 1/2 Mile of Rail Stations
0
0.5
Miles
µ
\Planning\MultiFamilyDistricts_022022.aprx  b.w.a  02/18/2022
Town of Needham GIS
