
===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
Town of Needham MBTA Communities Act Frequently Asked Questions 
 
Town of Needham 
MBTA Communities Act Frequently Asked Questions 
 
For the most updated materials, please visit the May 5, 2025 Annual Town Meeting website: 
https://needhamma.gov/5652/May-2025-Annual-Town-Meeting.  
 
 
 
1. What is the MBTA Communities Act? 
Massachusetts passed a new state law (MGL c.40A Section 3A) that requires 177 cities and 
towns who are served by the MBTA, including Needham, to establish a zoning district within 0.5 
miles from a commuter rail station, in which multi-family housing is allowed as-of-right. The 
Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities established regulations 
further detailing compliance requirements. 
 
2. What does Needham’s multi-family housing district need to comply with the law? 
Metric 
Needham’s Requirement 
Minimum Land Area 
50 acres 
Minimum Unit Capacity (15% of Needham’s 
existing number of housing units) 
1,784 units 
% located within 0.5 mi of commuter rail 
90% 
Minimum Zoning Density 
15 units per acre 
Deadline for Compliant Zoning 
July 14, 2025 
 
3. Does Needham need to build all of this housing? 
No, the law does not require that any housing be built. It requires that Needham establish 
zoning that allows for multi-family housing as specified above. 
 
 
 
4. What is the proposed zoning for multi-family housing in Needham? 
The Planning Board is advancing one proposal: the Base Compliance Plan. Passage of the Base 
Compliance Plan and accompanying map change article (Articles 18 & 19) would bring 
Needham into compliance with the law. The map and zoning parameters for the Base 
Compliance Plan can be found in Addendums A and B. 
 
Needham 
Requirement 
Base Compliance 
Plan 
Acreage (net) 
50 
100.3 
Unit Capacity 
1,784 
1,870 
Density (units/acre) 
15 
18.6 
Percent near transit 
90% 
93% 
What is the MBTA Communities Act? What is required by the Town? 
What is the Town’s current zoning proposal? 

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
Town of Needham MBTA Communities Act Frequently Asked Questions 
 
5. How does the proposed zoning differ from what is currently zoned? 
Maps and charts comparing Needham’s existing zoning with what is being proposed in the Base 
Compliance Plan are in the overview presentation posted on the May 5, 2025 Annual Town 
Meeting page: https://needhamma.gov/5652/May-2025-Annual-Town-Meeting. 
 
The Base Compliance Plan does not make any changes to the underlying zoning. The proposal 
would establish a zoning overlay district, which would add new options for multi-family housing, 
in addition to the building types and uses already allowed in Needham’s existing Zoning By-Law. 
Needham’s Existing Zoning Map can be v iewed here. 
 
6. What are the likely and maximum number of housing units that could be built? 
 
Base Compliance Plan 
Likely Build Out 
411 units 
Full Build Out 
1,870 units 
 
A chart comparing how many housing units exist on these parcels today and how many could 
potentially be allowed under Needham’s current zoning with what is being proposed can be 
found in Addendum C. The full build out totals are the maximum number of units the zoning will 
allow, but it is unlikely that every property owner will choose to redevelop their property. 
 
7. What parking will be required? 
The Base Compliance Plan requires a minimum of 1.0 parking spots per housing unit. A 
developer may choose to build additional parking, if they believe that a higher ratio is 
necessary to rent or sell each unit based on market demand. 
 
8. Can we control the style/design of the housing? 
Similar to Needham’s existing zoning, multi-family housing developers would be required to get 
advisory input from the Design Review Board during the Planning Board’s review process. 
 
9. Will new housing built under this proposal be affordable? 
The Base Compliance Plan requires that 12.5% of all new units in buildings with 6 or more units 
are set aside as deed restricted affordable housing. 
 
 
 
10. What are the fiscal impacts (revenue and expenses) on the Town and Schools? 
The Town’s consultants, RKG Associates, constructed a fiscal impact model to understand the 
potential tax revenues from new housing developments compared to the municipal and school 
operating costs to support those housing units. The analysis concludes that on a per unit basis, 
newly built multifamily units will generate more tax revenue than operating costs for the Town. 
A presentation on this analysis is available on the May 5, 2025 Annual Town Meeting page: 
https://needhamma.gov/5652/May-2025-Annual-Town-Meeting. 
What are the anticipated impacts on Town resources and infrastructure? 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
Town of Needham MBTA Communities Act Frequently Asked Questions 
 
11. What is the anticipated impact on school enrollment? 
The estimated number of school aged-children projected from the Base Compliance Plan 
appear in the chart below. This analysis assumes varying ratios of students per unit, based on 
the bedroom count and income level of the household. 
 
Base Compliance Plan 
Likely Build Out 
55 students 
Full Build Out 
236 students 
 
These projections are consistent with the student generation rates that Needham has 
experienced over the last five years from Charles River Landing, Hamilton Highlands, the 
Kendrick, Modera, Rosemary Lake Apartments, and Rosemary Ridge. The Needham Public 
Schools monitors enrollment trends and engages a consultant for annual enrollment forecasts. 
Any student projections related to this zoning will be incorporated into that work. 
 
Compared to current school capacity, the Base Compliance Plan Likely Build would exceed 
elementary capacity by 31 students (1%). Current middle school and high school capacity 
accommodates the Base Compliance Plan. The School Department has developed a master plan 
for updating aging school facilities and creating enrollment capacity, district-wide. The School 
Committee’s preferred master plan scenario would renovate the Pollard for grades 6-8, 
repurpose the High Rock as a 6th elementary school, and renovate the Mitchell as a 3 or 4 
section school. The Base Compliance Plan likely build is within the capacity of the School Master 
Plan at all school levels.  
 
12. What are the potential capital impacts for the Town of Needham due to this zoning? 
The Department of Public Works, Needham Public Schools, Finance Department, Building 
Department, Police Department, and Fire Department reviewed the zoning proposal. Staff 
compared the growth projections with Town capital infrastructure systems, known needs and 
proposed improvement projects informed by their expertise and source documents. Major 
conclusions are listed below and a detailed memo is available on the May 5, 2025 Annual Town 
Meeting page: https://needhamma.gov/5652/May-2025-Annual-Town-Meeting.  
 
Police, Fire/EMS: No anticipated capital impacts due to recent investments in the Public Safety 
Building and Fire Station 2. The Fire Department’s current apparatus can serve the height and 
density of the buildings that would be allowed. 
 
Water & Sewer:  The Town believes it has enough water capacity to support housing that may 
result from the proposed zoning. DPW does not anticipate that the proposed zoning will result 
in a need for new capital projects to expand existing water or sewer capacity due to the 
following considerations: 
• 
The proposed areas for rezoning are already developed. 
• 
The main factors that will drive the need for Town capital investments are the age and 
condition of the existing infrastructure. 
• 
All proposed developments must show there is adequate water, sewer, and utility 
service. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
Town of Needham MBTA Communities Act Frequently Asked Questions 
 
• 
The Town is not required to shoulder any capital investment needed to make a project 
viable. 
• 
At some sites, new housing development may reduce pressure on the Town’s water, 
sewer, and drain systems compared to the current use or age of the existing building. 
 
DPW may adjust the scope of projects needed due to current conditions to factor in population 
growth. DPW provides a thorough review of all projects that go through the Planning Board to 
ensure that projects comply with local requirements related to water, sewer, and stormwater. 
EOHLC guidelines state that “compliance with Section 3A does not require a municipality to 
install new water or wastewater infrastructure, or add to the capacity of existing infrastructure, 
to accommodate future multi-family housing production within the multi-family zoning district.” 
 
Stormwater: Addressing stormwater quality and capacity will be a Town priority for the 
foreseeable future. DPW received funding in 2024 for a Stormwater Master Plan to identify and 
prioritize stormwater capital projects townwide. There has been flooding throughout Needham, 
including in some areas proposed for rezoning. Proposed developments will be subject to the 
Town’s Stormwater Bylaw, stormwater utility fee, flood plain requirements, and wetlands 
regulations. The Select Board has established a Stormwater Bylaw Working Group to make 
recommendations for revisions to the Town’s bylaw to strengthen requirements related to 
stormwater capacity. 
 
Environmental: Compliance with the MBTA Communities Act is a stated action in Needham’s 
Climate Action Plan to work towards the goal that “Needham has low-carbon mobility options 
accessible to all.” All housing built under this zoning must comply with the Opt-In Specialized 
Energy Code. Any new multi-family housing over 12,000 square feet will need to meet Passive 
House standards and any new multi-family housing under 12,000 square feet will need to be all- 
electric or, if using fossil fuel combustion systems, will need to provide pre-wiring for future 
appliances and HVAC electrification and install solar to offset energy usage. 
 
13. What is the anticipated impact on traffic? Is this rezoning coordinated with efforts to expand 
bike lanes in Needham or other roadway improvement projects? 
The Town hired GPI to conduct a traffic analysis to assess the impacts of the likely build out of 
the Base Compliance Plan, which can be found here. GPI analyzed 15 key intersections in the 
area proposed for rezoning and compared anticipated traffic volumes in 2034 with and without 
new zoning for multi-family housing. GPI concluded that the Base Compliance Plan would have 
little to no impact on traffic volumes and, with recommended mitigation measures, the traffic 
system will maintain acceptable levels of service under the likely build out of the Base 
Compliance Plan. 
 
The Department of Public Works is currently proposing a redesign of Great Plain Avenue from 
Linden Street to Warren Street. A roadway improvement project for Highland Avenue between 
Webster Street and Great Plain Avenue is also planned to slow car speeds, better accommodate 
bicycles and pedestrians, and improve traffic flow by having signalized intersections “talk” to 
signals further north on Highland Avenue to Needham Street in Newton. These two roadway 
projects are planned, regardless of the zoning proposal, and will address 7 of the 9 
intersections where GPI recommended mitigation strategies to ensure efficient traffic flow. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
ADDENDUM A – Base Compliance Plan Map 
 
Town of Needham MBTA Communities Act Frequently Asked Questions 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
ADDENDUM B – Zoning Parameters 
 
Town of Needham MBTA Communities Act Frequently Asked Questions 
 
 
BASE COMPLIANCE PLAN 
Apartment 
A1 
Business 
Avery Square 
Business 
Chestnut St. 
Business 
Hillside Ave. 
Business 
Industrial 
Minimum Lot 
Size (Sq. feet) 
20,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
Height (Stories) 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR) 
0.50 
1.30 
0.70 
0.70 
0.50 
Max Lot 
Coverage 
25% 
Max Dwelling 
Units Per Acre 
18 
44 
18 
Parking per Unit 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
4 stories, an 
FAR of 1.7 
and > 44 
units/acre  
allowed by 
Special 
Permit. 
 

===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
ADDENDUM C – Unit Capacity Comparison 
 
Town of Needham MBTA Communities Act Frequently Asked Questions 
 
 
Zoning District 
Existing  
Zoning 
Existing 
Zoning  
Unit  
Capacity 
 
Existing Zoning 
with Overlay 
Special Permit 
Unit Capacity 
 
Base Compliance 
Plan Unit 
Capacity 
Apartment A1 
588 
526 
526 
526 
Business 
4 
N/A 
N/A 
210 
Avery Square 
Business 
72 
77 
77 
189 
Chestnut St. East 
46 
370 
987 
370 
Chestnut St. West 
Chestnut St./Garden 
St. 
Hillside Ave Business 
44 
46 
46 
80 
Industrial – Crescent 
21 
N/A 
N/A 
495 
Industrial – Hillside 
TOTAL UNITS 
775 
1,019 
1,636 
1,870 
 
