
===== PAGE 32 =====
                                                                                                          31 | P a g e 
 
ARTICLE 48:  Amendment to Town Code Chapter 2-28 Earth Removal, Section 2-28-060 
To see if the Town will vote to amend Part 2 of the Northborough Town Code, General Legislation, Chapter 
2-28 Earth Removal, Section 2-28-060, by adding the underlined text and deleting the text shown with strike-
through, or take any action relative thereto. 
“2-28-060 Performance bond; duration of permit; public hearing 
The Earthwork Board, or in the case of land in the Industrial zoning district, the Planning Board, may require, 
as a condition to the granting of a permit for the removal or importation of soil, loam, sand, gravel, stone or 
other earth material, that the permittee furnish cash, a certified check or a surety company bond to the town 
as obligee in a penal sum to be fixed by said Earthwork Board as it shall deem sufficient to cover the cost of 
the performance of all labor and material as shall be required to carry out all the conditions, limitations and 
safeguards as may be imposed by said Earthwork Board in connection with the removal or importation of the 
particular substances for which the permit is issued. No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this 
chapter for a period of more than one three years, though permits may be renewed upon written request by 
the permittee. Prior to issuing or renewing or amending any permit, the Earthwork Board shall appoint a time 
and place for a public hearing, notice of which shall be given to the applicant and all abutters and shall be 
published at least 21 14 days before such hearing in a newspaper having a circulation in the town.” 
MOTION ARTICLE 48:  Amendment to Town Code Chapter 2-28 Earth Removal, Section 2-28-060 
I move the Town vote to amend Part 2 of the Northborough Town Code, General Legislation, Chapter 2-28 
Earth Removal, Section 2-28-060, by adding the underlined text, by deleting the text shown in strikethrough 
all as set forth in Article 48 in the warrant. 
ARTICLE 49:  Zoning Map – Multi-family Development Overlay District 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Northborough Zoning Map to create the “Multifamily Development 
Overlay District (MDOD)” consisting of subdistricts “Southwest Connector Multifamily Development Sub-
District” and “Downtown Multifamily Development Sub-District” shown on the map entitled “Multifamily 
Development Overlay District Map” placed on file with the Town Clerk and Planning Department, or take 
any action relative thereto. 
(INSERT MAP) 
MOTION ARTICLE 49:  Zoning Map - Multi-family Development Overlay District 
I move the Town vote to amend the Northborough Zoning Map to superimpose the “Multifamily 
Development Overlay District (MDOD)” consisting of subdistricts “Southwest Connector Multifamily 
Development Sub-District” and “Downtown Multifamily Development Sub-District” on land as shown on 
the map entitled “Multifamily Development Overlay District Map,” as set forth in the Warrant.   

===== PAGE 33 =====
                                                                                                          32 | P a g e 
 
ARTICLE 50: Zoning Bylaw Section 7-04-010 Classification of Districts and Section 7-07-
050, Multifamily Development Overlay District  
To see if the Town will vote to amend Part 7 of the Northborough Town Code, the Northborough Zoning 
Bylaw Section 7-04-010 and add a new Section 7-07-050 as set forth in the underlined text below, or take 
any action relative thereto. 
1: Amend Section 7-04-010 Classification of districts. 
 B. Overlay districts.  There are hereby established the following overlay districts:   
(1) Groundwater Protection Overlay District (GPOD). 
(2)  Floodplain Overlay District (FOD). 
(3) Major Commercial Development Overlay District (MCDOD). 
(4) Residential- Open Space Planning Overlay District (ROPOD). 
(5) Multifamily Development Overlay District (MDOD). 
 
2:  Add Section 7-07-050 Multifamily Development Overlay District. 
7-07-050 Multifamily Development Overlay District. 
A. Purposes.  The purposes of the Multifamily Development Overlay District, hereinafter referred to as 
the “MDOD,” are: 
(1) To comply with the requirements for MBTA communities as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 3A;  
(2) To diversify the Northborough housing stock and create pedestrian-friendly development by 
promoting the creation of multi-family housing within close proximity to shopping, eateries, 
local services, and major transportation corridors;  
(3) To encourage the adaptive reuse, development and redevelopment of vacant and underutilized 
buildings and properties;  
(4) To support local businesses and promote the revitalization of downtown Northborough by 
increasing the size of the customer base;  
(5) To respond to the local and regional need for affordable housing by requiring housing options that 
are affordable and add to the Northborough SHI (Subsidized Housing Inventory);   
(6) To meet the housing and economic development goals articulated in the 2020 Master Plan.   
 
B. Applicability.  The MDOD is an overlay district superimposed over the underlying zoning districts 
as set forth on the map entitled “Multifamily Development Overlay District Map.”   This map is 
hereby made part of the Zoning Map – Town of Northborough, and is on file in the Office of the 
Town Clerk.     
 
The MDOD contains the following sub-districts: 
(1) Southwest Connector Multifamily Development Sub-District 
(2) Downtown Multifamily Development Sub-District 
 

===== PAGE 34 =====
                                                                                                          33 | P a g e 
 
C. Relationship to existing zoning.  In the MDOD, all requirements of the underlying district shall remain 
in effect except where these regulations provide an alternative to such requirements, in which case 
these regulations shall supersede.   Where the provisions of the MDOD are silent on a zoning 
regulation that applies in the underlying district, the requirements of the underlying district shall 
apply.   
 
Permitted Uses in the MDOD as set forth in Section E, herein, are exempt from the requirements of 
the Groundwater Protection Overlay District provided that the proponent shall demonstrate and 
certify that:  a) runoff waters leaving the site via surface flow will not violated Class B water quality 
standards (314 CMR 4.00) and that runoff waters leaving the site via groundwater recharge will not 
violate Class 1 groundwater quality standards (314 CMR 6.00); b) the increase in post-development 
net runoff volume shall not exceed existing conditions by more than fifteen percent (15%); and c) any 
on-site sewage disposal is less than or equal to one hundred ten (110) gallons per day per ten thousand 
(10,000) square feet of lot area, such determinations to be made by the Building Inspector in 
conjunction with a staff/consulting civil engineer and other relevant Town staff. 
 
D. Procedures and Regulations.   Development under this section requires Site Plan Review by the 
Planning Board under Section 7-03-050 and design review by the Design Review Committee under 
Section 7-03-060.  The Planning Board may adopt design guidelines for the MDOD that are not 
inconsistent with this Section or other applicable sections of the Northborough Zoning Bylaws. 
 
E. Use regulations. 
(1) Permitted uses.  The following uses shall be permitted by-right in the MDOD, subject to site plan 
approval under Section 7-03-050.  Uses are as defined in Section 7-05-020 unless otherwise 
specified below: 
(a) Attached single-family dwelling or townhouse. 
(b) Multifamily dwelling, defined as a building with three (3) or more residential dwelling units 
or two (2) or more buildings on the same lot with more than one (1) residential dwelling in 
each building. 
(c) Mixed-Use Development containing a mix of residential uses and non-residential uses.  
Developments in the MDOD may include the following non-residential uses within a vertical 
or horizontal mixed-use development provided that non-residential uses are located on the 
first floor and, when combined, do not exceed 8,000 square feet within the Southwest 
Connector Multifamily Development Sub-District. Non-residential uses that require a special 
permit or are otherwise not permitted in the underlying district shall require a special permit 
by the Planning Board in the MDOD. 
1. Retail store.  
2. Personal service establishment. 
3. Professional, medical, and dental, or business office. 
4. Bank or automated teller machine. 
5. Deli, sandwich shop, pizza shop, or take-out food service. 
6. Restaurant, excluding alcoholic beverages. 
7. Restaurant, including alcoholic beverages. 
