
===== PAGE 1 =====


 
 
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 

		

		 		 
	 Norwood, MA 
	 
	 
	 


		


 
 
 


 





		



 
 	
 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



		 
 	 
	 

		




	 
	
		 
			



 
 


			
				




 

  
	 
		





     
         
             
                
                    
                        
                             
                                 
                                     THE 07/29/26 SUMMERFEST SHOW IS CANCELLED: 
                                     
                                        Due to the predicted forecast.
                                     
                                    
                                        
                                             Learn More 
                                        
                                    
                                       
                                 
                             
                        
                    
                
             
         
         
               
               
         
     



	 
	 
		 
			 
				 
			 
			 
				  
				  
			  
		  
		 
			 
							 		
			







 
 
	  Departments 
		 
			  Airport  
			  Animal Control  
			  Assessors  
			  Building  
			  Community Development  
			  Economic Development  
			  Engineering  
			  Facilities  
			  Finance & Accounting  
			  Fire  
			  General Manager  
			  Health  
			  Human Resources  
			  Morrill Memorial Library  
			  Norwood Light & Broadband  
			  Police  
			  Public Works  
			  Purchasing  
			  Recreation  
			  Schools  
			  Selectmen  
			  Senior Center  
			  Town Clerk  
			  Treasurer & Collector  
			  Veterans' Services  
		 
	 
	  Boards/Committees 
		 
			  Airport Commission  
			  Board of Assessors  
			  Board of Health  
			  Board of Registrars  
			  Board of Selectmen  
			  Budget Balancing Committee  
			  Cable Commission  
			  Capital Outlay Committee  
			  Commission on Disability  
			  Community Preservation Committee  
			  Conservation Commission  
			  Council on Aging  
			  Cultural Council  
			  Economic Development Committee  
			  Finance Commission  
			  Historical Commission  
			  Library Board of Trustees  
			  Master Plan Steering Committee  
			  Personnel Board  
			  Planning Board  
			  Retirement Board  
			  Stormwater Utility Study Committee  
			  Sustainability Commission  
			  Town Meeting  
			  Town Meeting Rules Committee  
			  Trails Advisory Committee  
			  Zoning Board of Appeals  
		 
	 
	  Residents 
		 
			  Resident Request Portal  
			  Become Involved  
			  Composting  
			  Highland Cemetery  
			  Holidays & Community Events  
			  Housing  
			  Licensing & Permitting Fees  
			  Maps  
			  Public Health Services  
			  Public Service Videos  
			  Snow & Ice Removal Policy  
			  E-Notify  
		 
	 
	  Business 
		 
			  Available Sites & Buildings  
			  Building  
			  Business Resources  
			  Community Development  
			  Doing Business With the Town  
			  Economic Development  
			  Expedited Permitting  
			  Film in Norwood  
			  Licenses & Permitting  
			  Norwood Light & Broadband  
			  The Norwood Advantage  
			  Welcome to Norwood Videos  
		 
	 
	  How Do I... 
		 
			  Apply for a Birth/Death/Marriage Certificate  
			  Apply for Boards & Committees  
			  Apply for Community Development Permits  
			  Apply for Fuel Assistance  
			  Contact a Department  
			  Find Election Results  
			  Find Trash and Recycling Information  
			  Find Volunteer Opportunities  
			  Online Payments and Donations  
			  Pay a Parking Ticket  
			  Pay a Recreation Fee  
			  Read Financial Reports  
			  Read the Annual Report  
			  Read the Town Charter & By-Laws  
			  Register to Vote  
			  Request a Public Record  
			  Run For Office  
			  Sign Up for Alerts  
			  Submit a Concern  
			  View a Public Meeting  
			  View Elected & Appointed Officials  
			  View GIS Information  
		 
	 
	  Online Payments and Donations  
 

 
 

 

 





		  
		 
			 
				 
					 
											 		
					
						   
					
						   
					
				  
				   
				 
					 
						   
						 
						 Go 
					 
				  
			  
		  
	  
  


				 
 


	
	 
		 
			 
				 
				
			 
		 

		
		
			 
				    
			  
		

		 
			 
				   
				   
			 
		 
		 
			 

MBTA Communities FAQs 
			 
				 Where am I: 
				   Home     Departments     Community&nbsp;Development     MBTA&nbsp;Community&nbsp;Initiative    MBTA&nbsp;Communities&nbsp;FAQs  
			  
		 
	  


				 
					 
						 
										

	
		 
			 
				 
					 
					
					


					 
				 	
				 
					
						 Related Pages 
					

						
  
	  Applications, Forms, and Regulations  
	  Fee Schedule  
	  Online Mapping (GIS)  
	  Photo Gallery  
	  Planning Board  
	  Plans & Studies  
	  Zoning Map and Bylaws  
	  MBTA Community Initiative 
		 
			  MBTA Communities FAQs  
		 
	 
	  Welcome to Norwood Videos  
	  Proposed Zoning Amendments  
	  Housing Services  
	  Zoning Board of Appeals  
	  Conservation Commission  
	  Comprehensive Plan  
	  Trails Advisory Committee  
	  Stormwater & Preparedness  
 

				 
			 

			 
				 
					 
					 
				 	
				 
					
				 
			 
		 
	

							 
								 							
									 
										 
											  
											

 
	
		 
	
	
	
	
	
 
The MBTA Communities Task Force and Planning Board have created a proposed zoning  bylaw  and  map  to bring Norwood into compliance with the new MBTA Communities law, also known as 3A. Please explore the FAQs to learn more about the proposal, law, and the process to get here.&nbsp;


	 

 
			 
			   



 


 



                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What is the MBTA Communities law (3A)? 
   MBTA Communities refers to&nbsp; Section 3A of Massachusetts General Law Chapter 40A , as passed by the state legislature in 2021. 
 &nbsp; 
 The law concerns zoning, not construction. Zoning is how towns and cities regulate land uses and dimensional requirements for parcels and districts of land. Compliance with the law involves creating certain changes to the Zoning Bylaw. Production of housing or resulting construction of hard units is NOT a measurement of compliance with MBTA Communities. 
 The law states: &ldquo;An MBTA community shall have a zoning ordinance or by-law that provides for at least 1&nbsp; district &nbsp; of reasonable size &nbsp;in which&nbsp; multi-family housing &nbsp;is permitted&nbsp; as of right ; provided, however, that such multi-family housing shall be without age restrictions and shall be&nbsp; suitable for families with children .&rdquo;&nbsp; 
 &nbsp; 
 
 The law defines a&nbsp; district of reasonable size  as having a minimum gross density of 15 units per acre. It must be located within 1/2 mile from the relevant transit option(s) in a given town. At least half of the district must comprise contiguous lots of land of a minimum of 5 acres. The total district is required to be 50 acres or 1.5% of the &ldquo;developable land&rdquo; available. 
  Multi-family housing  means housing with at least 3 units on one piece of property.&nbsp; 
  Unit capacity  refers to the total number of units that could be placed on one piece of property, based on the town&rsquo;s zoning regulations. Unit capacity is NOT a count of existing homes nor a projection of what will be built, it is a hypothetical measure of how many units could be created on a blank parcel of land according to the dimensional requirements (height, setbacks, minimum area), parking requirements, open space requirements, and other provisions established in the Zoning Bylaw. 
  As of right  means that projects that comply with the zoning bylaws can cleanly move through Planning Board&rsquo;s Site Plan Review without requiring any discretionary approvals such as special permits, variances, or waivers. In our discussions we will use the terms &ldquo;as of right&rdquo; or &nbsp;&ldquo;by-right&rdquo; &nbsp; 
 The law does not allow for restrictions or specifications on age restrictions, size of individual units, bedroom counts/size, or number of occupants&mdash;the zone must allow multi-family housing be  suitable for families with children .&nbsp; 
 The law does not require any&nbsp; affordability&nbsp; restrictions, although towns can choose to include them if they wish. More information is below. 
 
 &nbsp; 
 We recommend visiting the state Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities&nbsp; general MBTA Communities page &nbsp;for more info.&nbsp;  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What does this mean for Norwood? 
  Norwood has three commuter rail stations: Norwood Central, Norwood Depot and Windsor Gardens.&nbsp; We are required to zone for a unit capacity of at least 2,045 units at a gross density of at least 15 units per acre across a minimum of 50 acres. Note: these are minimum requirements and a compliant zoning district will require at least one or more of these thresholds to be exceeded. 
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 How did the state calculate our requirements? 
   Norwood&rsquo;s required total zoned unit capacity was calculated by multiplying the total number of housing units in Norwood against the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities' (EOHLC) multiplier per our definition as a commuter rail community.&nbsp; 
 Our required reasonable district size was calculated to be 50 acres. The district was defined to be either 50 acres of 1.5% of the developable land area in town, whichever is less. 
 For more details on all of the above definitions and calculations,&nbsp;  please see the guidance issued from the Department of Housing &amp; Community Development (DHCD),   now called the Executive Office of Housing &amp; Livable Communities (EOHLC).  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Does our Zoning Bylaw already comply with the law? 
    No. &nbsp;At this time, Norwood does not comply with the requirements. While we do have a multi-family zoning district within a &frac12; mile of Windsor Gardens, and allow for multifamily housing in in various base districts or overlay districts that allow multi-family housing, and most significantly, have plenty of existing multifamily housing near the train stations, the zoning itself does not comply with the new requirements. No one district meets the required combination of as-of-right status, unit capacity, density, and acreage. Again, the law focuses on potential unit capacity as dictated by the zoning, NOT on what is currently on a given site.&nbsp; 
 &nbsp; 
 For more detail on Norwood&rsquo;s current Zoning please see the most current Zoning Bylaw and Zoning Map, located here:  https://www.norwoodma.gov/departments/planning_and_economic_development/bylaws_and_regulations.php   
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Why should we comply with the new law? 
   The intention of the law is for  all  communities in eastern Massachusetts to share in the creation of diverse housing options. Norwood has a diverse housing stock that has historically contained significant amounts of workforce (including multifamily) housing, but many communities have not. In fact, many municipalities have created zoning that make multifamily housing illegal altogether. By working jointly over time to create more housing, the region can begin to address its dire affordability issues as the aggregate increase in housing stock releases pressure in the housing market over the long-term.&nbsp;Transit-oriented development is sustainable, smart growth that benefits the environment and local business economy. 
 Communities that fail to comply will not be eligible for funds from the Housing Choice Initiative, the Local Capital Projects Fund, or the MassWorks infrastructure program, as well as a number of discretionary grants from the state across a variety of program areas. 
 In March 2023 State Attorney General Campbell additionally clarified that failure to comply may result in civil enforcement action or liability under federal and state fair housing laws e.g. the state will sue municipalities that do not comply. ( Press release ) 
 Complying with the new law will contribute to easing the housing crisis, support more accessible development for seniors and persons with disabilities, and encourage development that is friendlier to the environment by reducing how much land is needed to be used per household, improving heat and energy efficiency, and reducing the number of cars on the road compared to single family developments. 
 Norwood has a strong commitment to compliance with all applicable state laws, and continued compliance protects the Town&rsquo;s fiscal and legal interests.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 How does compliance work? 
   Town Meeting will need to approve changes to our zoning by the end of 2024 in order to comply. The proposed changes have been submitted to the warrant for the March 21, 2024 Special Town Meeting. If Town Meeting approves these articles, staff will submit the changes to both the Attorney General and EOHLC for approval. Note that the draft changes have already been submitted to EOHLC for preapproval; a response is still pending but is expected to be received in time for March STM, so that voters will be confident that the language meets the state law.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What has the process been to arrive at this point? 
   The Planning Board appointed an MBTA Communities Task Force in 2022 to lead a public planning process and draft recommended zoning. Members are Ernie Paciorkowski (Planning Board), Shannon Greenwell (ZBA), Rachel Churchill (at large), Patrick Ronin (at large), Matt Lane (Board of Selectmen) and ex officio members Sarah Dixon (Director of Community Development) and Mike Rosen (Assistant Town Manager). 
 The Task Force had five (5) publicly posted meetings and commissioned a comprehensive public engagement strategy. It used NCM broadcasts, local newspapers, the town website and social media to deliver public education on the new law and the Task Force&rsquo;s work. In 2023, the Task Force held six (6) engagement events intended to involve the public and incorporate feedback on how the zoning should be written. These events were offered in both hybrid and in person format, and some were cohosted by community groups such as the Council on Aging, Commission on Disability or the League of Women Voters. Small group discussions were the primary format for these events to ensure ample opportunity for each attendee to participate. A survey was conducted with over 100 respondents. The project was represented at the town&rsquo;s Juneteenth event as well as Norwood Day in an effort to maximize outreach to the public. The Task Force&rsquo;s draft proposal was discussed at three publicly posted Planning Board meetings, resulting in a vote to enter the changes to the Board of Selectmen for inclusion on the March 21, 2024 Special Town Meeting warrant.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What changes are being proposed? 
   A quick summary:  A new zoning overlay district called the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to have three subdistricts, each with distinct dimensional requirements: Norwood Central, Norwood Depot, and Windsor Gardens. In this district, multifamily housing will be permitted by right, but the dimensional standards vary. Front setbacks, for example, vary between subdistricts owing to the existing built environment of these areas. Norwood Depot will allow a much smaller front setback (5&rsquo;), which allows for development, particularly mixed use development, that activates the streetscape and is consistent with other buildings in the Central Business District. Norwood Central&rsquo;s subdistrict is located across Lenox Street from mostly single family and two family homes, so to mitigate the differences in building height and preserve the residential setting for those neighbors, a 20&rsquo; front setback is required (and the tallest portions of the building must be stepped-back to 40&rsquo; from the right of way). Mixed use, meaning land with both commercial and residential components, will be permitted but not required throughout. The total land area is just shy of 80 acres, with 100% within a half mile radius of train stations, and the gross density is about 44 units per acre.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 How did you come up with this proposal? 
   This district was designed from start to finish based on feedback we&rsquo;ve received from the public. For most of 2023, the Task Force embarked on a public education and learning process. The goal of these efforts (including the survey, tabling at community events, workshops, public presentations and small group discussions) has been to learn from residents about their preferences and priorities for future multi-family housing in Norwood. It has been important to the Planning Board and staff that the Task Force educate residents on zoning and the history of zoning in Norwood while engaging them on the specific questions and requirements of the law. 
 Based on the results of our public process, we&rsquo;ve placed the proposed district strategically, selecting areas within the half mile areas surrounding each train station that are either appropriate for redevelopment or are already consistent with the parameters of the proposed zoning. The selected areas take into consideration the existing variety of structures on each street as they relate to our proposed MCMOD. 
 We feel the proposal outlined in this report is a thoughtful, middle-of-the road proposal. It meets the state&rsquo;s requirements while keeping strong dimensional controls that should deliver attractive, compatible buildings with more open space than other recent multi-family projects in Norwood. It allows three story buildings to allow increased accessibility and elevator serviced buildings, but caps total height at 4 stories (with provisions in some instances to allow 5 stories if certain public interest criteria is met). It proposes greater acreage than the minimum required by law in order to create a district with more gentle density increases relative to existing housing.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 How was the geographic location of the district chosen? 
   Public feedback has been clear that multi-family should be near transit, commercial uses, and pedestrian-friendly areas; people felt strongly that the single family neighborhoods should remain as they currently are. The Task Force identified districts within the &frac12; mile zones that contained parcels that are mostly zoned Manufacturing but otherwise near less compatible uses (like residential), are good candidates for redevelopment with vacant or underutilized land, and/or parcels that are currently used as multifamily housing already. &nbsp; 
 The proposed district locations encourage reinvestment in key areas of Town in ways that are more compatible with existing land uses, increase tax revenue for the Town, and support the local economy by creating more vibrant neighborhoods with high walkability to small businesses.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What were the survey results? 
   Over 100 responses were logged, and respondents were diverse in their age, number of years residing in Norwood, and household income. Most respondents owned their home (85%), which is greater than the general population ( Census data  reports that the owner occupied housing rate in Norwood is about 51%). &nbsp;83% of survey respondents reported living in a single family home, which is  similarly higher  than the actual population of Norwood. 
 Respondents agree that Norwood does not have enough affordable housing:   
 Most people preferred to see increased housing density in the areas around all three train stations, with Route One being a runner-up.   
 The majority of respondents either had a personal need or knew someone who could benefit from some type of affordable or supportive housing (categories listed below are Affordable housing for low income families or individuals, Affordable housing for low income seniors, Affordable housing for moderate income families or individuals, Affordable housing for moderate income seniors, supportive housing for seniors and supportive housing for people with disabilities):    
 To view the full results of the survey, click  here .  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What were the outcomes of the public engagement sessions? 
   Over 70 people participated in the Task Force&rsquo;s public engagement sessions in 2023. Attendees were divided into small groups and led through a series of discussion prompts. Groups talked about the parts of Norwood they loved most, the housing needs they felt were unmet in the community, and shared their stories about personal experiences with housing in Norwood &ndash; the good, the bad, and everything in between. Participants represented all walks of life in Norwood: long time residents, newcomers, seniors, small business owners, property owners, renters, owners, and more. And most people had lived in a variety of housing types over their lifetime, including single family homes, duplexes, triple deckers, larger high ride complexes, dorms, military housing, affordable housing and more. 
 Although every participant shared their own unique stories and views, with each and every one valid and heard, there were some themes of consensus that emerged. 
 The Norwood love was strong: people&rsquo;s lists of what they love about this town were long! They love the affordable tax rate, public services like the senior center and library, walkability, vibrant downtown, municipal electric and broadband, diversity and strong sense of community in our neighborhoods. 
 They agreed that in a &ldquo;perfect Norwood&rdquo;, housing options would include increased options for seniors and people with disabilities as well as more affordable units across the board. A priority for walkable housing (perhaps above storefronts or closer to amenities like stores, parks, jobs, etc) emerged, and there was support for green space and sustainable buildings when possible. Participants were interested in smaller living options, like &ldquo;in-law&rdquo; style units or &ldquo;right-size&rdquo; homes appropriate for downsizing. &nbsp;Support for the Norwood Housing Authority and its portfolio of senior/disabled and deeply affordable (30% AMI) housing was strong. 
 Small businesses and commercial interests were represented, too. They loved Norwood for a lot of the same reasons residents do: inexpensive and reliable electricity, competitive tax rates, proximity to roadways and public transit, clean water, and loyal customers! Employers shared that the increased cost of living makes it hard to attract and retain employees, many of whom are burnt out with longer commutes to Norwood or struggling to start families. Some real estate developers or landowners interested in producing housing options in Norwood reported that the current zoning was creating barriers to meeting market demands, particularly considering the increased costs of land and construction. 
 Everyone at our small group discussions shared deep and meaningful concerns about Norwood&rsquo;s future. Some were worried about young people in town, with many sharing sadness that children raised in Norwood couldn&rsquo;t afford to return as adults. Most expressed a strong interest in staying in Norwood, particularly as they age, but worried that their current housing would be too large and unaffordable, or inaccessible if/when mobility challenges arise. Many, having never experienced housing instability, shared a feeling of gratitude to call Norwood home, wondering how they would have been able to afford it if they were searching for housing today.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Will every parcel get redeveloped for multifamily housing? 
   No. Recall that this law is about zoning, not production. There is no requirement for any new housing to be constructed right away or even long term. The goal is to zone for multifamily housing in areas that the town feels are appropriate and in ways that fit the Town&rsquo;s needs. In this way, when redevelopment does occur (i.e., land sells, a business closes, an owner decides to move in a different direction, etc.), it will be in accordance with the Town&rsquo;s interests as set forth in the Zoning Bylaw. Just because something is an allowed use does not mean that every land owner instantly chooses to redevelop as such! Did you know that child care centers, nursing homes, religious/educational uses and farm stands are permissible uses on every parcel in the single family residential districts in Norwood? Most single family homeowners aren&rsquo;t interested in changing the use and/or redeveloping their properties. Uses are only pursued when the market supports it and the owner is in a position to redevelop. 
 It is true that there will be some parcels in the new MCMOD that are redeveloped, and probably sooner rather than later, but these parcels were intentionally included in the districts because they are vacant or underutilized parcels where redevelopment would serve the public interest, increasing the amount of taxable value to the Town, incorporating stormwater improvements that would benefit the surrounding area, and/or require environmental remediation of contamination from former industrial uses.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Will redevelopment under this new Bylaw still need permits? 
   Yes. By-right, or as-of-right development means that a project will require no waivers, special permits, or any other discretionary approvals. A project is still required to go through the normal development processes including Site Plan Review by Planning Board, and/or the regular building permitting approvals. This is an opportunity for the elected Planning Board as well as town staff like Conservation, Public Safety, Light, Fire, Health and others to ensure compliance with our other standards. Anything requiring review under local and state wetlands protection regulations would still need to go before Conservation Commission as normally required.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Is affordable housing required? 
   Yes. There was strong consensus across the board with all public feedback that Norwood urgently needs more affordable housing. This is consistent with the data available to us, which shows that around 40% of residents in Norwood are considered cost-burdened or severely cost burdened, spending more than 30%&nbsp; or 50% of their household incomes on housing, respectively. In response, the proposal includes a requirement for deed-restricted Affordable units to be provided with projects of 8 units or more. 10% of units must be Affordable and offered for those whose incomes are 80% of the area median income (AMI) for projects with 8-15 units; 20% of units must be Affordable in projects with 16 units or more. 
 The proposal also offers an incentive for projects to exceed these affordability requirements. One area of consensus in public feedback was that even the affordable housing Norwood has isn&rsquo;t really affordable. This is understandable &ndash; the typical rents for affordable units in Norwood that are targeted to households making 80% of Area Median Income (AMI) are around $2500 per month. For many people, particularly entry level and minimum wage workers, seniors and others on fixed incomes, this is out of reach. The proposal responds to this need by offering an incentive to Projects that set aside an additional 5% of units for households at 50% of AMI. In exchange for providing this additional supply of more deeply affordable housing, an eligible project may receive one additional story of building height to what is allowed in the subdistrict. No subdistrict would exceed 5 stories in height.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Is all of it affordable housing? 
  No. The intent of this new law was to encourage housing production generally and meet the statewide demand for homes across all markets. The public input received in Norwood was strongly in favor of increased affordability, so we opted to require a percentage of all new development to be set aside as affordable. The rest of new housing produced as a result of the MBTA Communities law will be available to everyone.&nbsp; 
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Will it all be apartments? 
  No. Multifamily housing is defined as three (3) or more units on a lot. The law does not regulate housing type, i.e., whether it is a rental, ownership, co-op, etc. The market will determine which types of housing are developed, if any. &nbsp; 
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What building incentives are there for projects that meet specific public interests? 
  The proposal creates incentives for public priorities that reflect the values and goals of the community. Each incentive category offers one additional story of building height in exchange for meeting requirements. One category requires more sustainable construction and increased stormwater management design. Another category offers the incentive to projects that stack parking (first floor garages) or create underground garages, and creates additional open space with the surface parking area. Both of those incentives provide heat island mitigation, which is an important part of the Town&rsquo;s overall climate resiliency and hazard mitigation planning efforts. A third incentive relates to affordable housing, awarding an extra floor of building height to projects restricting an additional 5% of units for deep affordability at 50% AMI. 
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 When do the new units have to be built? 
   No construction is required for compliance with the law. Compliance with the law is zoning only.&nbsp; 
 &nbsp;  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What happens after this is approved by Town Meeting? 
   Once the zoning amendments are adopted by Town Meeting they will be approved by EOHLC and the Attorney General&rsquo;s office and become active. 
 Once the zoning overlay is created, it is up to each individual property owner to decide if and when they want to redevelop their property. None of the changes made require any development. The changed zoning will simply offer the opportunity to redevelop according to the standards adopted by Town Meeting.&nbsp;  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 This is the first I'm hearing about this. How have you reached out to the public about it? 
   The Task Force prioritized outreach to the public and did its best to incorporate feedback and involvement with the public. Our strategy was to publicize and educate early in the process to try to bring as many interested residents into the discussion before anything was decided, so that the Task Force and Planning Board would have the necessary and crucial input to draft zoning directly shaped by residents&rsquo; views&mdash;as gathered in our survey and discussion sessions. 
 The Task Force had five publicly posted meetings and commissioned a comprehensive public engagement strategy. It used NCM broadcasts, local newspapers, the town website and social media to deliver public education on the new law and the Task Force&rsquo;s work. In 2023, the Task Force held six (6) engagement events intended to involve the public and incorporate feedback on how the zoning should be written. These events were offered in both hybrid and in person format, and some were cohosted by community groups such as the Council on Aging or the League of Women Voters. Small group discussions were the primary format for these events to ensure ample opportunity for each attendee to participate. A survey was conducted with over 100 respondents. The project was represented at the town&rsquo;s Juneteenth event as well as Norwood Day in an effort to maximize outreach to the public. The Task Force&rsquo;s draft proposal was discussed at three publicly posted Planning Board meetings, resulting in a vote to enter the changes to the Board of Selectmen for inclusion on the March 21, 2024 Special Town Meeting warrant. 
 A full list of engagement events is on the website, and more are posted in the coming months. Some of these events are still upcoming! Please join us. We also invite you to check the town website regularly for posted agendas for all Community Development boards and commissions, and follow the Town of Norwood on social media as a way to stay tuned to all the wonderful things happening in Norwood.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Why isn't Norwood just proposing the bare minimum? Why exceed any requirements? 
   Compliance is an equation. To comply with land area, density, and unit capacity, Norwood&rsquo;s proposed district has to exceed minimums in at least one area to be compliant as a whole. Norwood&rsquo;s proposal achieves the required unit capacity by spreading the required unit density across a larger area. Additionally, the dimensional controls on parking, density, open space, setbacks, building height, etc. are intended to be appropriate and consistent with existing neighborhoods, so that any future development does not represent a fundamental shift in the built environment. 
 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; As an illustration: If residents were to decide that open space were the primary concern, and wanted to require a majority of every parcel developed to be preserved as open space, then the zoning proposal would need to either expand the land area considerably to meet the unit capacity, or allow for exceptionally tall building height, or both, since the surface area available for buildings would be much smaller. In another scenario, if residents were to decide that short, one story buildings was the primary goal, then again, the zoning proposal would need to either expand the land area, reduce open space and parking minimum requirements, or both. 
 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The proposal before Norwood achieves a healthy balance of the priorities established during the public planning process: reasonable amounts of open space, &ldquo;just right&rdquo; amounts of parking, building heights and setbacks that are in scale with the existing neighborhoods, and locations in transit-friendly, walkable and accessible parts of town.  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Norwood already has so many multifamily buildings. Why don't those comply? 
   The law is a zoning mandate, not a construction/production mandate that measures compliance with the number of hard units on the ground, either before or after the bylaw is changed. 
 That said, the proposed MCMOD utilizes land that includes lots of existing multifamily housing already.   This is helpful in three ways: First, any resulting new multifamily housing will be located in areas where some already exists. No single family residential zoning is impacted by the proposed changes, which serves to preserve the character of those existing neighborhoods.   Second, some of the existing multifamily housing is nonconforming on use (ie multifamily is not permitted), but would become conforming to the Bylaw if the proposal passes. Bylaws that create conditions that are largely unmet due to nonconformity are often ineffective and cumbersome to enforce.   Third, some existing multifamily housing was recently constructed to similar densities than the proposal (think about the Crossings or Avalon). Although the land area of those parcels counts towards our compliance, it is unlikely that any redevelopment of those parcels under the new zoning would occur as there is little to no incentive created by this new zoning to do so. This allows the zoning to have a more modest impact on the actual redevelopment that follows.&nbsp;  
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 My property is in the proposed overlay. What happens next? 
  New zoning, if passed, would not require any construction or compel property owners to redevelop multifamily housing. At some point in the future, you may have an interest in redeveloping your property or selling it. If that happens, multifamily housing development according the new zoning overlay would be another allowable use. Market conditions often result in a property being more competitive on resale as a result.&nbsp;&nbsp; 
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 What is next in the process? 
   
 The Planning Board will host a public hearing on the articles on February 12, 2024 at 7 pm at the Norwood Senior Center and online at the following Google Meet link:  https://meet.google.com/mhu-ifvs-njz . 
 Another informational session for Town Meeting members will be held on February 28, 2024 at 6:30 pm (location TBD &ndash; check back on the town&rsquo;s website for details). 
 Planning staff will host Open Houses on Monday Jan 29 and Friday Feb 16 from 9-11 am in Memorial Hall at Town Hall. Any members of the public are invited to drop by to preview the proposed changes and ask questions. Coffee and refreshments will be served. 
 Planning staff will also host an Open Mic night on Monday March 11 from 7-8:30 pm on Google Meet: https://google.com/obu-tgtf-wbc . This session will begin with a brief presentation on the proposed changes and then open to attendees for questions and comments. 
 Special Town Meeting will be held on March 21, 2024 at 6:30 at the Norwood High School. Check the town website for updates. If needed, a second meeting will be held on March 25. 
 
If approved, the changes are sent to the state for approval and will become effective. 
 




                 
                  


  
 

                  



 
 
                  
  
 Are there other resources to learn more about this? 
   Massachusetts Housing Partnership&rsquo;s short video:&nbsp; Why MBTA Multifamily Zoning Makes Sense for Massachusetts  
 This&nbsp; informative video by City Beautiful &nbsp;explains many of the zoning concepts that are crucial to understand in relation to the law.&nbsp; 
 Amy Dain&rsquo;s five-part series in Commonwealth Magazine in 2022 gives the non-planner a good understanding of the MBTA Communities law and how it will impact local Massachusetts MBTA towns and cities: 
 
  &ldquo;What the MBTA Communities law means for your town&rdquo;  
  &ldquo;Solving the MBTA communities zoning puzzle&rdquo;  
  &ldquo;Seeking predictable permitting for new housing&rdquo;  
  &ldquo;Where should new multi-family housing go&rdquo;&nbsp;  
  &ldquo;Overcoming the restrictions on multi-family housing&rdquo;  
 
 The 2019 Report &nbsp;"The State of Zoning for Multi-Family Housing in Greater Boston" &nbsp;by Amy Dain is informative context on regional trends in zoning and housing.&nbsp; 
 The Metropolitan Area Planning Council (MAPC) has an informative&nbsp; Regional Housing Page &nbsp;with information, toolkits, reports, and more. 
 The&nbsp; Citizens' Housing and Planning Association&nbsp;(CHAPA) &nbsp;is a non-profit advocate for affordable housing in the region and they host events, programming, and housing opportunities and are an educational resource. 
 The EOHLC &nbsp;released updated guidance on the law in August 2023.   
 



 

                
			  
		     
 
	
	


										  
									  
								 
							  
						  
					  
				 

				 
					 
						 
					 

					 
					 
						 
						 
						Please ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of 
						 website accessibility 
						 
					 	 

					 
						 
					  
					 
						    
							 
								   English   
								  Afrikaans  
								  Albanian  
								  Arabic  
								  Armenian  
								  Azerbaijani  
								  Basque  
								  Belarusian  
								  Bengali  
								  Bosnian  
								  Bulgarian  
								  Catalan  
								  Cebuano  
								  Chinese (Simplified)  
								  Chinese (Traditional)  
								  Croatian  
								  Czech  
								  Danish  
								  Dutch  
								  Esperanto  
								  Estonian  
								  Filipino  
								  Finnish  
								  French  
								  Galician  
								  Georgian  
								  German  
								  Greek  
								  Gujarati  
								  Haitian Creole  
								  Hausa  
								  Hebrew  
								  Hindi  
								  Hmong  
								  Hungarian  
								  Icelandic  
								  Igbo  
								  Indonesian  
								  Irish  
								  Italian  
								  Japanese  
								  Javanese  
								  Kannada  
								  Khmer  
								  Korean  
								  Lao  
								  Latin  
								  Latvian  
								  Lithuanian  
								  Macedonian  
								  Malay  
								  Maltese  
								  Maori  
								  Marathi  
								  Mongolian  
								  Nepali  
								  Norwegian  
								  Persian  
								  Polish  
								  Portuguese  
								  Punjabi  
								  Romanian  
								  Russian  
								  Serbian  
								  Slovak  
								  Slovenian  
								  Somali  
								  Spanish  
								  Swahili  
								  Swedish  
								  Tamil  
								  Telugu  
								  Thai  
								  Turkish  
								  Ukrainian  
								  Urdu  
								  Vietnamese  
								  Welsh  
								  Yiddish  
								  Yoruba  
								  Zulu  
							 
						 
					  

					 
		 
		 
		 Share this page 
	 

	 
		 
			 
				 
					Share this page
					   
						 
						    -->
				 
				 
					 
						 
							     
						 
	
						 
							     
						 
	
						 
							     
						 
	
						 
							     
						 
					  
					
				  
				 
					 Close 
				 
			 
		  
	  
  


 
 
  
		 
	 
	 
		 
	 
 
 
	 
		 
	 
 

	 

	 
				 


				



 

 
	 
		 
			 
							 	
		 
		 
			
				
					
						
						 Boards & Commissions 
					
				
					
						
						 Resident Information 
					
				
					
						
						 Permits & Licenses 
					
				
					
						
						 Business Resources 
					
				
					
						
						 Engineering Department 
					
				
					
						
						 Fire 
					
				
			
		 
	 
	 
		 
			 
							 	
		 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				 
				 
					
						
							  566 Washington St. Norwood, MA 02062 
						
					
						   (781) 762-1240 
					
						   Email 
					
						  Mon-Fri, 8:00 am - 4:00 pm 
					
				  
			  
		  
		 
			 
				 
					 
						  
						 
							Powered by  revize.,  the Government Website Experts
						  
					  
					 
						 Privacy Policy  
						  
						 
							 Login: 
							
								
									
										
										 Intranet 
									
								
							
						 
					 	
				 
			  
		  
	 
  

			



 
 
 
 
 


			



 



		 
	
 

