
===== PAGE 1 =====



 
 
	 
		 
		 
		 
		 

		

		 		 
	 Norwood, MA 
	 
	 
	 


		


 
 
 


 





		



 
 	
 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



		




	 
	
		 
			



 
 


			
				




 

  
	 
		





     
         
             
                
                    
                        
                             
                                 
                                     THE 07/29/26 SUMMERFEST SHOW IS CANCELLED: 
                                     
                                        Due to the predicted forecast.
                                     
                                    
                                        
                                             Learn More 
                                        
                                    
                                       
                                 
                             
                        
                    
                
             
         
         
               
               
         
     



	 
	 
		 
			 
				 
			 
			 
				  
				  
			  
		  
		 
			 
							 		
			







 
 
	  Departments 
		 
			  Airport  
			  Animal Control  
			  Assessors  
			  Building  
			  Community Development  
			  Economic Development  
			  Engineering  
			  Facilities  
			  Finance & Accounting  
			  Fire  
			  General Manager  
			  Health  
			  Human Resources  
			  Morrill Memorial Library  
			  Norwood Light & Broadband  
			  Police  
			  Public Works  
			  Purchasing  
			  Recreation  
			  Schools  
			  Selectmen  
			  Senior Center  
			  Town Clerk  
			  Treasurer & Collector  
			  Veterans' Services  
		 
	 
	  Boards/Committees 
		 
			  Airport Commission  
			  Board of Assessors  
			  Board of Health  
			  Board of Registrars  
			  Board of Selectmen  
			  Budget Balancing Committee  
			  Cable Commission  
			  Capital Outlay Committee  
			  Commission on Disability  
			  Community Preservation Committee  
			  Conservation Commission  
			  Council on Aging  
			  Cultural Council  
			  Economic Development Committee  
			  Finance Commission  
			  Historical Commission  
			  Library Board of Trustees  
			  Master Plan Steering Committee  
			  Personnel Board  
			  Planning Board  
			  Retirement Board  
			  Stormwater Utility Study Committee  
			  Sustainability Commission  
			  Town Meeting  
			  Town Meeting Rules Committee  
			  Trails Advisory Committee  
			  Zoning Board of Appeals  
		 
	 
	  Residents 
		 
			  Resident Request Portal  
			  Become Involved  
			  Composting  
			  Highland Cemetery  
			  Holidays & Community Events  
			  Housing  
			  Licensing & Permitting Fees  
			  Maps  
			  Public Health Services  
			  Public Service Videos  
			  Snow & Ice Removal Policy  
			  E-Notify  
		 
	 
	  Business 
		 
			  Available Sites & Buildings  
			  Building  
			  Business Resources  
			  Community Development  
			  Doing Business With the Town  
			  Economic Development  
			  Expedited Permitting  
			  Film in Norwood  
			  Licenses & Permitting  
			  Norwood Light & Broadband  
			  The Norwood Advantage  
			  Welcome to Norwood Videos  
		 
	 
	  How Do I... 
		 
			  Apply for a Birth/Death/Marriage Certificate  
			  Apply for Boards & Committees  
			  Apply for Community Development Permits  
			  Apply for Fuel Assistance  
			  Contact a Department  
			  Find Election Results  
			  Find Trash and Recycling Information  
			  Find Volunteer Opportunities  
			  Online Payments and Donations  
			  Pay a Parking Ticket  
			  Pay a Recreation Fee  
			  Read Financial Reports  
			  Read the Annual Report  
			  Read the Town Charter & By-Laws  
			  Register to Vote  
			  Request a Public Record  
			  Run For Office  
			  Sign Up for Alerts  
			  Submit a Concern  
			  View a Public Meeting  
			  View Elected & Appointed Officials  
			  View GIS Information  
		 
	 
	  Online Payments and Donations  
 

 
 

 

 





		  
		 
			 
				 
					 
											 		
					
						   
					
						   
					
				  
				   
				 
					 
						   
						 
						 Go 
					 
				  
			  
		  
	  
  


				 
 


	
	 
		 
			 
				 
				
			 
		 

		
		
			 
				    
			  
		

		 
			 
				   
				   
			 
		 
		 
			 

MBTA Community Initiative 
			 
				 Where am I: 
				   Home     Departments     Community&nbsp;Development    MBTA&nbsp;Community&nbsp;Initiative  
			  
		 
	  


				 
					 
						 
										

	
		 
			 
				 
					 
					
					


					 
				 	
				 
					
						 Related Pages 
					

						
  
	  Applications, Forms, and Regulations  
	  Fee Schedule  
	  Online Mapping (GIS)  
	  Photo Gallery  
	  Planning Board  
	  Plans & Studies  
	  Zoning Map and Bylaws  
	  MBTA Community Initiative 
		 
			  MBTA Communities FAQs  
		 
	 
	  Welcome to Norwood Videos  
	  Proposed Zoning Amendments  
	  Housing Services  
	  Zoning Board of Appeals  
	  Conservation Commission  
	  Comprehensive Plan  
	  Trails Advisory Committee  
	  Stormwater & Preparedness  
 

				 
			 

			 
				 
					 
					 
				 	
				 
					
				 
			 
		 
	

							 
								 							
									 
										 
											  
											

 
	
		 
	
	
	
	
	
 
    
   Multi-Family Zoning Requirement for MBTA Communities   In January 2021, the Massachusetts legislature approved changes to the Zoning Act. The new Section 3A of M.G.L. c. 40A now requires that an MBTA community shall have at least one zoning district of reasonable size in which multi-family housing is permitted as of right and meets other criteria set forth  in the statute:   Minimum gross density of 15 units per acre Not more than &frac12; miles from a commuter rail station, subway station, ferry terminal or bus station, if applicable. No age restrictions Suitable for families with children  Norwood is one of 177 municipalities in the state that is considered an MBTA Community due to its access to commuter rail. The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) is overseeing compliance with these new requirements, and has issued final guidance in August 2022 on implementation. Although the implementation phase will allow for ample time for communities to pass new zoning, once it is fully operational, non compliant communities will not be eligible for various state funding programs.&nbsp;    UPDATE!  The MBTA Communities Task Force and Planning Board have submitted draft articles, including a proposed amended Zoning Map and Zoning Bylaw to the Board of Selectmen for inclusion on a March 21, 2024 Special Town Meeting warrant. The articles are linked here:  Map  and  Bylaw . Read all about these changes in the   new FAQ section  . For a full history of the process leading to this point, we encourage to scroll through the timeline of updates below. Please don't hesitate to contact the Planning Department with any questions about this important initiative.&nbsp;         
     
    Status Updates and Resources:     
 
 DHCD issued preliminary guidelines in December 2021. You can locate that guidance here:  https://www.mass.gov/doc/draft-guidelines-for-mbta-communities/download&nbsp;  
 A memo from the Planning Department to the Planning Board describing how the guidelines apply to 
 &nbsp;Norwood:  Memo 3.7.22  
 DHCD accepted public comment on this guidance until March 31, 2022. 
 Final guidance was released in August 2022 and may be located here:  https://www.mass.gov/doc/compliance-guideli  
  nes-for-multi-family-zoning-districts-under-section-3a-of-the-zoning-act/download  
 Norwood's Planning Board created an MBTA Communities Task Force to research, advise and plan for compliance with this legislation. The Task Force is comprised of representatives from the Planning Board, Planning Department, Managers' Office, Board of Selectmen, and residents at large. 
 The Task Force began meeting in September 2022 to begin the process of identifying appropriate locations for the newly mandated zoning districts. 
 The Task Force, Planning Board and Community Development Department recommended that the Board of Selectmen authorize the Director of Community Development to submit an Action Plan by end of January 2023, a first step in achieving compliance with the new state law 
 The Board of Selectmen voted to issue this authorization on January 10, 2023. 
 The  Action Plan  was submitted timely and Norwood received its certification of interim compliance on February 17, 2023. You can locate that certification here:  Certification of Interim Compliance  
 The state Attorney General's office released this statement on municipal compliance on March 15, 2023:  MBTA Communities Advisory  
 The first step in the planning process as defined by the Task Force is a robust community engagement strategy that includes opportunities for education, participation and feedback. The first phase, education and information, began in March 2023. 
 In February, town staff secured technical assistance for this phase at no cost to the town in CHAPA's Community Engagement Technical Assistance Program. 
 The Task Force's goal is to have proposed zoning on a March 2024 Special Town Meeting warrant. Full compliance must be complete by December 2024. The Town of Norwood is on track to meet this goal. 
 A community informational session was held on April 25, 2023, with over 60 people in attendance. The presentation may be viewed here:  Information Session April 25, 2023  
 Community feedback workshops were held in June and July, all welcome to the public for discussion and input. Some were co-hosted by such groups as Commission on Disability, Council on Aging, Friends of Norwood Center and Neponset River Regional Chamber. Workshops were well attended and many productive ideas and concerns were shared and will be considered by the Task Force in its draft bylaw. 
 Find out more about the Massachusetts Housing Partnership&rsquo;s MBTA Zoning &amp; Complete Neighborhoods initiative here:  Complete Neighborhoods Initiative  
 The Massachusetts Housing Partnership&rsquo;s 15-minute Neighborhood  Handbook . 
 The Massachusetts Housing Partnership&rsquo;s Complete Neighborhoods Initiative  Presentation . 
 The Massachusetts Housing Partnership&rsquo;s MBTA Communities  Introductory Video . 
  All are encouraged to take the Official Survey located here: &nbsp; https://forms.gle/ sEPeXTBF4u2drVTr8   
 The Task Force presented recommendations to the Planning Board on October 23. The Planning Board is reviewing a working draft and will discuss suggested edits at its meeting on November 6. 
   Presentation to Planning Board on 10-23-23   
   Draft Bylaw (10-23-23)   
  Draft Proposed Zoning Maps (10-23-23):  Norwood Central Subdistrict   Windsor Gardens Subdistrict &nbsp;  
  Joint meeting on October 23 recording located  here   
  Planning Board informal discussion and work session recording located  here   
  On January 8, 2024 the Planning Board held a final public work session on the draft bylaw and voted to submit the zoning to the Board of Selectmen for placement on the March, 21, 2024 Special Town Meeting warrant  
  Planning Board informal discussion and vote to submit MBTA zoning article to BOS recording located  here   
  Final proposed Zoning Map located  here   
  Final proposed Zoning Bylaw articles located  here&nbsp;   
  Planning Board 2/12/24 Public Hearing recording located  here   
  Norwood Community Media presentation on MBTA Communities located  here   
  2/28/24 Town Meeting Info Session for Town Meeting Members located  here   
  Economic Feasibility Analysis located  here .&nbsp; This study was required by EOHLC for those communities wishing to implement affordability requirements higher than the standard set by 3A. Norwood received a grant from MHP to fully fund the cost of this study.&nbsp; 
 
  Meetings of the Task Force will be posted on the Norwood Homepage Calendar. Updates on progress will be posted on this page. Questions about these new requirements may be directed to cped@norwoodma.gov.     Upcoming Events:     
 
  Planning Board public hearing: February 12, 2024 7 pm, 275 Prospect St and on Google Meet at  https://meet.google.com/mhu-ifvs-njz   
  Open House: January 29,&nbsp; 9-11 am, Town Hall, Memorial Hall. Planning staff and Board/Task Force volunteers will be available to share the proposed document, answer questions, and discuss the proposed changes in a relaxed setting. Coffee and refreshments will be available.&nbsp;  
 
 
  Open House: February 16,&nbsp; 9-11 am, Town Hall, Memorial Hall. Planning staff and Board/Task Force volunteers will be available to share the proposed document, answer questions, and discuss the proposed changes in a relaxed setting. Coffee and refreshments will be available.&nbsp;  
  Town Meeting Member Information Session: February 28, 6:30 pm, located via Google Meet  https://meet.google.com/qaw-owqp-ggw  or in-person at the Usevich Lecture Hall, Norwood High School, 245 Nichols Street. . All TMMs invited to hear a presentation on the articles and ask questions.&nbsp;  
  Open Mic Night: March 11, 7 pm, on Google Meet at&nbsp; https://meet.google.com/obu-tgtf-wbc  : Planning staff and Board/Task Force volunteers will be available to share the proposed document, answer questions, and discuss the proposed changes in a relaxed setting.  
 Special Town Meeting, March 21, 2024, 6:30 pm, Norwood High School (check Town Clerk's page for updates) 
 
     MBTA Communities Task Force Members:     Ernie Paciorkowski, Planning Board Clerk Matt Lane, Selectman Shannon Greenwell, Zoning Board of Appeals Rachel Churchill, member at large Patrick Ronin, member at large Michael Rosen, Assistant Town Manager, ex-officio member Sarah Dixon, Director of Community Development, ex-officio member



										  
									  
								 
							  
						  
					  
				 

				 
					 
						 
					 

					 
					 
						 
						 
						Please ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of 
						 website accessibility 
						 
					 	 

					 
						 
					  
					 
						    
							 
								   English   
								  Afrikaans  
								  Albanian  
								  Arabic  
								  Armenian  
								  Azerbaijani  
								  Basque  
								  Belarusian  
								  Bengali  
								  Bosnian  
								  Bulgarian  
								  Catalan  
								  Cebuano  
								  Chinese (Simplified)  
								  Chinese (Traditional)  
								  Croatian  
								  Czech  
								  Danish  
								  Dutch  
								  Esperanto  
								  Estonian  
								  Filipino  
								  Finnish  
								  French  
								  Galician  
								  Georgian  
								  German  
								  Greek  
								  Gujarati  
								  Haitian Creole  
								  Hausa  
								  Hebrew  
								  Hindi  
								  Hmong  
								  Hungarian  
								  Icelandic  
								  Igbo  
								  Indonesian  
								  Irish  
								  Italian  
								  Japanese  
								  Javanese  
								  Kannada  
								  Khmer  
								  Korean  
								  Lao  
								  Latin  
								  Latvian  
								  Lithuanian  
								  Macedonian  
								  Malay  
								  Maltese  
								  Maori  
								  Marathi  
								  Mongolian  
								  Nepali  
								  Norwegian  
								  Persian  
								  Polish  
								  Portuguese  
								  Punjabi  
								  Romanian  
								  Russian  
								  Serbian  
								  Slovak  
								  Slovenian  
								  Somali  
								  Spanish  
								  Swahili  
								  Swedish  
								  Tamil  
								  Telugu  
								  Thai  
								  Turkish  
								  Ukrainian  
								  Urdu  
								  Vietnamese  
								  Welsh  
								  Yiddish  
								  Yoruba  
								  Zulu  
							 
						 
					  

					 
		 
		 
		 Share this page 
	 

	 
		 
			 
				 
					Share this page
					   
						 
						    -->
				 
				 
					 
						 
							     
						 
	
						 
							     
						 
	
						 
							     
						 
	
						 
							     
						 
					  
					
				  
				 
					 Close 
				 
			 
		  
	  
  


 
 
  
		 
	 
	 
		 
	 
 
 
	 
		 
	 
 

	 

	 
				 


				



 

 
	 
		 
			 
							 	
		 
		 
			
				
					
						
						 Boards & Commissions 
					
				
					
						
						 Resident Information 
					
				
					
						
						 Permits & Licenses 
					
				
					
						
						 Business Resources 
					
				
					
						
						 Engineering Department 
					
				
					
						
						 Fire 
					
				
			
		 
	 
	 
		 
			 
							 	
		 
		 
			 
				 
					 
				 
				 
					
						
							  566 Washington St. Norwood, MA 02062 
						
					
						   (781) 762-1240 
					
						   Email 
					
						  Mon-Fri, 8:00 am - 4:00 pm 
					
				  
			  
		  
		 
			 
				 
					 
						  
						 
							Powered by  revize.,  the Government Website Experts
						  
					  
					 
						 Privacy Policy  
						  
						 
							 Login: 
							
								
									
										
										 Intranet 
									
								
							
						 
					 	
				 
			  
		  
	 
  

			



 
 
 
 
 


			



 



		 
	
 

