
===== PAGE 10 =====
 
 
 
 
 
ATM - 10 
 
 
ARTICLE 16 (On the motion of Town Clerk Tara Shaw, 38 Elm Street) Move the Article as 
printed in the warrant with the funding source of raise and appropriate. 
Pass Unanimous 
 
ARTICLE 17 To see if the Town will vote to raise and appropriate or transfer from available 
funds the sum of $9,000.00 for the purpose of the Fiscal Year 2026 Real and Personal Property 
Interim Valuation of the Town, or take any other action relative thereto. 
Board of Assessors 
Recommended by Finance Committee (5-0); Recommended by BOS (3-0) 
 
ARTICLE 17 VOTE (On the motion of Ethan Stiles, 85 West Street) To move the article as 
printed in the warrant with the funding source of raise and appropriate. Seconded. 
 
Ethan Stiles, 85 West Street, Explanation: This article is in every year to pay a 3rd party vendor 
to pay for the valuations and this is for the coming fiscal year. 
 
Pass majority 
 
 
ARTICLE 18 To see if the Town will vote to amend Chapter 10 of the Town Code, Boards, 
Commissions and Committees, by adding a new Article V titled “Select Board”, as shown below, 
and further to delete the words “Board of Selectmen” and “Selectmen” in each place they appear 
in the Town Code, in both the General and Zoning Bylaws, and replace them with the words 
“Select Board”, or take any other action relative thereto. 
 
Article V Select Board 
 
§10-19 Establishment and Membership 
There shall be a Select Board composed of three (3) members elected for terms of three years 
each.   
 
§10-20 Duties 
The Select Board shall have all the powers and duties of a Board of Selectmen for purposes of 
General Laws and any special acts, bylaws, rules or regulations applicable to the Town of 
Plympton. The Select Board shall have general direction and management of property and 
affairs of the Town in all matters not otherwise provided for by law or these bylaws, including but 
not limited to the power to prosecute, compromise or defend suits for or against the Town and 
employ counsel at any time if, in its judgement, the interest of the Town so require.  
 
Or take any other action relative thereto. 
Board of Selectmen 
Recommended by BOS (2-1) 
 
ARTICLE 18 VOTE (On the motion of John Traynor, 82 Crescent Street) To move the Article as 
printed in the warrant. Seconded. 
 
 

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
 
 
 
 
ATM - 11 
 
 
Cathy Ferguson, 4 Brook Street, comment: thinks the article is an egregious waste of time. The 
article has been talked about before. It is Selectmen. That’s the end of it. 
Nancy Denman, 81 Ring Road, question: have there been any complaints through the years? 
John Traynor, 62 Crescent Street, answer: Comes up once in a while at outside meetings, 
especially when there are women on it. Kind of a throw away comment. Surprise. 
Nancy Denman, 81 Ring Road, comment: We have had many fine women serve on the BOS, 
the terminology hasn’t kept anyone from being on the board, most people with an education 
realize it’s a collective noun that includes men and women. 
John Traynor, 62 Crescent Street: As sponsor of the article, shared comments that can be found 
at hour 1:42:00 to  http://area58.tv/video/plympton-annual-special-town-meeting-may-14-2025/ 
Lisa Hart, 7 Marie Elaine Drive: Is there a cost associated with this?  
John Traynor, 62 Crescent Street: the answer will cost $1,000. 
Mark Russo, 140 Palmer Road: Speaks against the article. 
 
Article Fails 
 
 
Motion by the Moderator to not have to read the entire article. Sectonded. 
Pass 
 
ARTICLE 19 To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaw, codified as Chapter 300 
of the Town Code, to establish a Residential Development Overlay District, as follows; or to take 
any other action relative thereto.  
 
1. Amend Article III (“Districts”) to add a new § 300-3.6. as shown below and renumber the 
existing § 300-3.6. as § 300-3.7:  
 
§ 300-3.6. Residential Development Overlay District.  
The Residential Development Overlay District is an overlay district which is shown on the Town 
of Plympton Zoning Map. Any uses and structures allowed within the Residential Development 
Overlay District are subject to the regulations as provided in § 300-8.5 of this bylaw.  
 
2. Amend Article VIII (“Special Districts”) to establish a new § 300-8.5. entitled “Residential 
Development Overlay District (RDOD),” as follows:  
 
§ 300-8.5. Residential Development Overlay District (RDOD)  
A. Purpose.  
The purpose of the Residential Development Overlay District (RDOD) is to promote a lively, 
prosperous multi-family neighborhood close to existing municipal services and quality-of-life 
amenities. This bylaw encourages village-style residential developments that interact with the 
street. Specifically, this Bylaw is established to fulfill the following purposes:  
1. To encourage village-style development and build a range of market-rate housing to meet 
the demands of young families and seniors;  
2. Provide more affordable, income-restricted housing; and  
3. To meet the requirements of M.G.L. c. 40A § 3A.  
 
B. Establishment and Applicability.  

===== PAGE 12 =====
 
 
 
 
 
ATM - 12 
 
 
The area known as the Residential Development Overlay District shall be established as an 
overlay district as shown on the official Town of Plympton Zoning Map, as amended. This Section 
shall apply only to those uses allowed hereunder. For all other uses, the underlying zoning shall 
remain in full force and effect. The Planning Board may adopt, and amend, rules and regulations 
for the administration of this Bylaw that are consistent herewith.   
 
All lots and improvements in the RDOD shall be governed by this § 300-8.5. If there is any 
conflict between § 300-8.5. and other requirements of this Zoning Bylaw, the provisions of this 
§ 300-8.5. shall control, unless otherwise stated.  
 
C. Site Plan Approval.  
As defined in § 300-6.7. Site plans, the Planning Board shall be the designated Site Plan 
Approval Authority. All proposed developments within the Residential Development Overlay 
District shall require site plan approval and shall be subject to the provisions of the 
aforementioned Section, as may be amended from time to time. For the purposes of this § 300-
8.5. Residential Development Overlay District, the requirements of Chapter 340 (“Site Plan 
Regulations”) §§ 340-23 through 31 (“Development Impact Statement”) shall not apply to Multi-
Family Housing developments built in accordance with this § 300-8.5.  
 
D. Definitions.  
For the purposes of this § 300-8.5, Residential Development Overlay District, the following 
definitions shall apply. Terms not defined herein shall have the meanings given under § 300-
11.1. of these Zoning Bylaws or under M.G.L. c. 40A.  
1. Accessory Use or Structure: A use or a freestanding building or structure customarily 
incidental and subordinate to or necessarily essential to the principal permitted use or 
building, located on the same lot as the principal permitted use or building.   
2. Affordable Housing Unit:  A unit that is subject to a restriction in its chain of title limiting 
the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or household of a specified 
income, or both. Affordable units are required to be, eligible for inclusion on EOHLC’s 
Subsidized Housing Inventory. Nothing in this Bylaw changes the Subsidized Housing 
Inventory eligibility criteria, and no affordable unit shall be counted on the Subsidized 
Housing Inventory unless it satisfies the requirements for inclusion under 760 CMR 
56.03(2) or any other regulation or guidance issued by EOHLC.  
3. Applicant: A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit.  
4. Area Median Income (AMI): The median family income for the metropolitan statistical 
region that includes the Town of Plympton, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development.   
5. As of right: Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of 
application without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or 
other discretionary zoning approval. “As of right” uses may also be referred to as “by-
right” uses.  
6. EOHLC: The Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities or any successor 
agency.  
7. Multi-Family Housing: A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or 
more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each 
building.  
8. Section 3A: Section 3A of the Zoning Act.  

===== PAGE 13 =====
 
 
 
 
 
ATM - 13 
 
 
 
E. Permitted Uses.  
The following uses are permitted as of right within the Residential Development Overlay District:  
1. Multi-Family Housing.  
2. Accessory uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to Multi-Family 
Housing:  
a. Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an above ground 
or underground parking garage.  
b. Other accessory uses, provided they meet the definition of “Accessory Use or Structure,” 
as defined in § 300-8.5.D, Definitions.  
 
F. Dimensional Standards.  
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this § 300-8.5, the dimensional requirements 
applicable to uses in the Residential Development Overlay District are set forth in the Table of 
Dimensional Standards below. Landscaped buffer zones as defined in § 300-8.5.G., 
Development Standards, shall extend certain setbacks where required.  
  
  
Table of Dimensional Standards  
Dimension  
Standard  
Minimum Lot Size (Square Feet)  
40,000  
Maximum Height (Stories)  
2  
Maximum Height (Feet)  
25  
Maximum Lot Coverage1 (%)  
60  
Minimum Open Space (%)  
25  
Minimum Lot Frontage (Feet)  
100  
Minimum Front Yard Setback (Feet)  
40  
Minimum Side Yard Setback (Feet)  
40  
Minimum Rear Yard Setback (Feet)  
40  
Maximum Units per Acre  
16  
1. Multi-Building Lots. In the Residential Development Overlay District, lots may have 
more than one principal building.  
2. Exceptions. The limitation on height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, ventilators, 
towers, silos, spires, or other ornamental features of buildings, which features are in no 
way used for living purposes and do not constitute more than 25% of the ground floor 
area of the building.  
a. Renewable Energy Installations. The Planning Board may waive the height and 
setbacks in § 300-8.5.F. Dimensional Standards to accommodate the installation of solar 
photovoltaic, solar thermal, living, and other eco-roofs, energy storage, and air-source 
heat pump equipment. Such installations shall not create a significant detriment to 
abutters in terms of noise or shadow and must be appropriately integrated into the 
architecture of the building and the layout of the site. The installations shall not provide 
additional habitable space within the development.  
  
G. General Development Standards.  

===== PAGE 15 =====
 
 
 
 
 
ATM - 15 
 
 
variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the Residential Development Overlay 
District.  
 
H. Affordability Requirements.  
The purpose of this Section is to provide housing that is affordable to low- or moderate-income 
households. It is intended that the affordable housing units that result from this Section shall 
qualify as local action units (LAUs) under the Local Initiative Program (LIP), with requirements 
as defined in 760 CMR 56.00 and the LIP Guidelines. Said units shall count towards the Town’s 
requirement under M.G.L. c. 40B §§ 20 through 23 and will be eligible for inclusion on the 
Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI).  
1. Applicability. This requirement is applicable to all proposed residential developments 
with 10 or more dwelling units, whether new construction, substantial rehabilitation, 
expansion, or reconstruction. No project may be divided or phased to avoid the 
requirements of this Section.   
2. Provision of Affordable Housing. For all applicable projects, not fewer than 10% of 
housing units constructed shall be Affordable Housing Units. For the purposes of 
calculating the number of units of Affordable Housing required within a proposed project, 
a fractional unit shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. The Affordable 
Housing Units shall be available to households earning incomes up to 80% of the Area 
Median Income (AMI).  
3. Development Standards. Affordable Housing Units shall be:  
a. Integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, 
appearance, construction, and quality of exterior and interior materials with the other units 
and/or lots;  
b. Dispersed throughout the development;  
c. Located such that the units have equal access to shared amenities, including light and 
air, and utilities (including any bicycle storage or electric vehicle charging stations) within 
the development;  
d. Located such that the units have equal avoidance of any potential nuisances as market-
rate units within the development;  
e. Distributed proportionally among unit sizes; and  
f. Distributed proportionally across each phase of a phased development.  
4. Deed Rider. All Affordable Housing Units shall have an Affordable Housing Deed Rider 
which regulates the future resale of the unit. This Deed Rider is to ensure that the unit is 
not converted to a market value unit in the future. The Applicant is required to prepare a 
Deed Rider for each Affordable Housing Unit that is consistent with that used in the LIP 
and the Regulatory Agreement approved by EOHLC for recording with the appropriate 
Registry of Deeds or Registry District of the Land Court. Said Deed Rider shall be 
approved by Town Counsel prior to the sale of the first Housing Unit.  
5. Local Preference. The Applicant shall comply with the local preference requirements, if 
any, as established by the Select Board and to the extent such practice and its 
implementation are consistent with federal, state, and municipal laws and regulations.  
6. Administration. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for administering 
and enforcing the requirements of this Section.  
 
I. Invalidity and Severability.  

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
 
 
 
 
ATM - 16 
 
 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not affect the validity of any other 
provision thereof and said section or provision shall be deemed severable.  
 
J. Exemptions.  
The Planning Board shall have the right to waive strict compliance with the provisions of this by-
law for municipal uses proposed within the Residential Development Overlay District.  
  
3. Amend the Town of Plympton Zoning Map to include the new “Residential Development 
Overlay District,” as depicted on the map entitled “Residential Development Overlay 
District (RDOD),” dated April 3, 2025, which is on file at the Office of the Town Clerk.  
Planning Board 
Recommended by BOS (3-0) 
 
ARTICLE 19 VOTE (On the motion of Ann Sobolewski, Chair of the Planning Board, 255 Main 
Street) Planning Board Report given by Chairperson of the Planning Board, Ann Sobolewski. 
Seconded. 
Planning Board Report given by Chairperson of the Planning Board, Ann Sobolewski and 
Discussion. 
Report 
and 
Discussion 
can 
be 
found 
at 
hour 
1:48:50 
http://area58.tv/video/plympton-annual-special-town-meeting-may-14-2025/ 
 
John Traynor, 62 Crescent Street, comment: We do not like to have the state mandate us to 
make rules, but the receipt of grant funds can continue to be received if we comply. Mr. Traynor 
approves and asks for approval. 
Melissa Lunny, 4 Maple Street: concerned about lot sizes, would it change zoning lot sizes 
outside of this designated area? 
Ann Sobolewski, answer: No, it strictly applies to the automobile junkyard. In looking at the area 
in which to place this overlay district, the planning board actively considered the possibility that 
multifamily housing, if the technology exists in the future, that it would be a much better use for 
the town overall to have housing in that location than an automobile junkyard that potentially 
pollutes the water supply around the location. 
Cori MacGrail, 55 Brook Street, comment: there are other towns fighting this law. Marshfield has 
an ongoing lawsuit and there are other towns that have joined in. Common sense. Not sure why 
we would be names an MBTA community. We are an MBTA adjacent community that is a 
parameter within the MBTA Community Law. We are close to the Halifax train station. The 
requirements are less than a town that has a station in it. 
 
Pass majority 
 
Motion by the Moderator to not have to read the entire article. Seconded. 
Pass 
 
 
ARTICLE 20 To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaw, codified as Chapter 300 
of the Town Code, as follows:  
 
1. 
Amend Article V, Intensity of Use Regulations, § 300-5.10 Accessory Dwelling Units, to 
delete the strikethrough language and add the underlined language as follows: 

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
 
 
 
 
ATM - 17 
 
 
 
A. 
For the purpose of enabling the owners of single-family, owner-occupied dwellings that 
are larger than required for their present needs to share the space and burdens of home 
ownership, or for the purpose of providing a small additional dwelling unit to rent, an accessory 
dwelling unit (ADU) may be created, but only for one additional dwelling unit per lot as follows: 
 
(1) Within the physical boundaries of an existing Principal Dwelling single-family 
dwelling or in an existing detached structure accessory to a Principal Dwelling 
single-family use and located on the same lot, without any construction to 
increase the footprint of same, i.e., as of right ("by-right ADU") in accordance 
with the conditions set forth below; or 
 
(2) 
Either partially or entirely within (i) a proposed addition to an existing Principal Dwelling 
single-family dwelling or to an existing detached structure accessory to a Principal Dwelling 
single-family use and located on the same lot, or (ii) located in a new, detached 
structure, accessory to a Principal Dwelling single-family use and located on the same lot ("site 
plan review ADU") subject to site plan review by the Planning Board in accordance with the 
conditions set forth below. 
 
Unless expressly defined herein, terms used in this § 300-5.10 shall be defined as set forth in 
760 CMR 71.00, et seq., as it may be amended.  
 
2. Amend Article V, Intensity of Use Regulations, § 300-5.10 Accessory Dwelling 
Units, subsection C, to delete the strikethrough language and add the underlined 
language as follows: 
 
C.  
Conditions applicable to all accessory dwelling units (by-right ADU and site plan review 
ADU hereinafter collectively termed "accessory dwelling unit" or "ADU"): 
 
(1)  
The ADU must be used for residential housing purposes and either located within the 
existing Principal Dwelling single-family dwelling (hereinafter referred to as the "primary 
residence") or detached from the primary residence and located on the same lot as the primary 
residence in an existing outbuilding, such as a barn, garage or shed (hereinafter referred to as 
an "existing outbuilding"), additions to said primary residence or an existing outbuilding and the 
construction of a new outbuilding being subject to site plan review and approval by the Planning 
Board. 
 
(2)  
The ADU shall be designed so that it is consistent with the external appearance of the 
primary residence remains that of the primary residence a single-family dwelling. 
 
(3)  
Exterior alterations are permitted, provided they are in keeping with the architectural 
integrity of the primary residence or existing outbuilding containing the ADU and the character 
of the neighborhood, including, but not limited to, the following considerations: 
 
(a)   
The exterior finish material should be the same or visually consistent in type, size, and 
placement as the exterior finish material of the primary residence or the exterior finish material 
of the existing outbuilding containing the ADU; 
