
===== PAGE 24 =====
 
Article 16E: Reduce Borrowing – Pilgrim Hall Museum: Mr. Lalley asked what would happen if the estimated 
revenue didn’t come in at the estimated cost. Ms. Barrett advised that the reduction to borrowing would 
proportionately increase or decrease according to the approved budget. Mr. Green asked about the debt 
process. Ms. Barrett advised that Pilgrim Hall will be paid down before Stephen’s Field because Town owned 
property has a lower interest rate for borrowing. Mr. Green asked if borrowing is secured prior to the start of 
a project. Ms. Barrett advised that typically the Town self-funds projects at the start and then secures 
borrowing.   
 
Ms. Richards asked about the State Trust Fund Distribution on the Sources and Uses document. Ms. Barrett 
advised that it is an estimate based on 21% of the 2024 actual distribution amount.  
 
Mr. Cabana motioned to approve Article 16E to Town Meeting. Mr. Dunn Second. Motion carried 
unanimously, 13-0-0. 
 
Article 16F: Reduce Borrowing – Stephens Field: Ms. Barrett advised that this was the same strategy as the 
previous article to pay down the debt.  
 
Mr. Young motioned to approve Article 16F to Town Meeting. Ms. Butler second. Motion carried unanimously, 
13-0-0. 
 
Article 16G: FY25 CPA Budget – Mr. Keohan discussed the required set asides and the process for budgeting.   
Mr. Dunn moved to approve Article 16G to Town Meeting. Ms. Shaw second. Mr. Lalley asked if CPC funds 
could be used to buy the Holtec land as long as a conservation restriction was put on the property. Ms. Barrett 
said yes. Motion carried unanimously, 13-0-0. 
 
February 7, 2024 
Article 17: Amend Bylaw Ch23, Article I – Dog Control – Ms. McElreath, Town Clerk, has modeled this 
amended bylaw after other Towns bylaws which are already approved by the Attorney General. Mr. Cabana 
asked why beaches aren’t included in the bylaw. Ms. McElreath said she wasn’t getting involved in that and 
beaches have signs posted regarding the area dogs are allowed in. Mr. Canaba thinks having a bylaw on dogs 
that doesn’t include clarification on the beaches is leaving it open to individual interpretations. Ms. McElreath 
mentioned some minor changes to be made and Mr. Lalley suggested the committee wait for a final document 
before approving. Mr. Zupperoli feels leaving the beaches out of the bylaw is good and agrees that the 
committee should wait for the final document. Mr. Howard suggested similar wording on dogs for beaches 
following the regulations.  
 
Mr. Dunn motioned to table the article. Mr. Zupperoli second. Motion carried unanimously, 13-0-0. 
 
February 28, 2024 
Article 17: Amend Bylaw Ch23, Article I – Dog Control – Ms. Kelly McElreath, Town Clerk, feels the current 
version clears up the language. Ms. Butler questioned the Select Board, being the Hearing Authority. Laurie 
Dowes Precinct 17 is concerned with the language of unclaimed dogs being disposed of after 10 days. She 
said Harry Helm, Select Board member, calmed her concerns by saying every effort will be made to find the 
owner. She feels this should be stated in the bylaw. Ms. McElreath said that David Gould, who’s 
Department this previously came under, said that it rarely gets to that point and would be for biting or 
aggressive behavior. Ms. Abraham asked if the Town notifies the public if an adoption will be done. Ms. 
McElreath said the current hearing officer has deemed only 2 dogs in three years dangerous. Mr. Zupperoli 
motioned to approve Article 17 to Town Meeting. Ms. Zarou-Abraham second. The motion carried 

===== PAGE 25 =====
unanimously, 14-0-0. 
 
January 31, 2024 
Article 18: MBTA Communities: Ms. Judy Barrett, Barrett Planning Group, went over the MBTA Communities 
Law and the new section 206.6 Multifamily Overlay District (MOD).  The purpose of the law is to address the 
housing crisis, multifamily housing & boost housing supply. This is mandatory and violations can be imposed 
for noncompliance. 
 
Ms. Barrett said a variety of locations were looked at to analyze for compliance with the law. She is working 
with 20 communities to figure this out. The direction was to take credit for development already done.  Credit 
will be taken for the following sub-districts in the MOD: Cordage, Home Depot Drive, Plaza Way and Pinehills. 
Mr. Nearman asked about the deadline for compliance by Attorney General. Mr. Hartmann said December 31, 
2024. Mr. Howard asked what the other areas were considered. Mr. Hartmann said Redbrook, Market Basket 
and 2 other sites. 
 
Mr. Lalley motioned to recommend Article 18 to Town Meeting. Mr. Howard second. Mr. Lalley wanted to 
recognize the great work on this. Motion carried unanimously, 12-0-0. Mr. Lalley requested the presentation. 
Mr. Hartmann advised that it was on the website. 
 
Article 19: Amend Ch 90 §E Historically Significant Buildings- Mr. Hartmann discussed the Demolition Delay 
bylaw and the challenge the 14-day requirement has on commission. They are proposing to increase the 
decision period from 14 days to 21 days. Mr. Dunn moved to recommend Article 19 to Town Meeting. Mr. 
Cabana second. Motion carried unanimously, 12-0-0 
 
February 7, 2024 
Article 20: Withdrawn 
 
January 31, 2024 
Article 21: Amend Zoning Bylaw § 207-11 - Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Systems (GMSPS) – Mr. 
Pacheco, 11 Timothy Ln, Precinct 4 said that this article was presented at the Fall Town Meeting and the 
language has changed and been streamlined per the feedback received in the fall. The 1st change is not to base 
the bylaw on technology, which changes rapidly, but instead to base it on acreage. Specifically, 4 acres or 
greater. The 2nd change is to include language suggested by the Planning Department encouraging the 
owner/operator to notify neighbors that may be impacted. Mr. Patrick Farah, Energy Officer, went thru the 
bylaw with Mr. Pacheco to develop a better understanding of the bylaw and changes. The Energy Committee 
approved unanimously. Mr. Zupperoli asked if this doesn’t carry the force of the law why would we approve it. 
Mr. Farah said it was to show the town’s seriousness with regard to protecting residents.  
 
Mr. Lawlor motioned to recommend Article 21 to Town Meeting. Ms. Richards second. Mr. Howard likes these 
changes. Ms. Richards supports. Mr. Lalley concerns from last fall have been addressed with these changes 
and he now approves. Motion carried, 11-0-1, Mr. Zupperoli abstained. 
 
