
===== PAGE 1 =====
MBTA Communities Law | Commonly asked Questions 
Q: What is the “MBTA Communities Law”? 
The MBTA Communities law is a new state law that passed in 2021 as part of the Housing Choice Initiative and 
Economic Development Bond Bill.  
Q: What is the purpose of the new state law?  
The purpose of the new state law is to address the state’s housing crisis, encourage multifamily housing 
development and boost the state’s housing supply.  
Q: Where is the new zoning district located?  
Rockland’s Planning Board has put forward a proposed amendment to the Town’s zoning that would create a 
new zoning district “MUDD” that would make the Town of Rockland compliant with new State law. The new 
zoning district is located near the park n ride station by the Hingham Town Line. The proposed zoning district 
includes 60.5 developable acres, roughly 10 more than the minimum requirement of the State law. This 
additional acreage was included after consideration of how to retain openspace and the potential for how zoning 
could address the need to mitigate on-site water and sewer engineering needs without compromising open space 
and good design. 
 Q: How does this impact our sewer 
capacity? How does this impact our 
water supply?  
This law does NOT  require communities 
to pay for infrastructure to support the 
zoning district. All sewer and water 
infrastructure requirements will need to be 
mitigated onsite by private development. 
The Town and their departments are not 
required to provide upgrades to 
accommodate the new district.  
Q: Do developers get to circumvent local 
zoning or environmental protections in 
this district?  
The  proposed new zoning district, does NOT overide the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act or Title V of 
the Massachusetts Environmental Code and does NOT provide options for waivers or exemptions. The new law 
does not override local zoning laws.  
Q: What types of development is allowable in the new district?  
The proposed zoning district is required to allow multifamily housing development “by-right”. Additionally, the 
zoning identifies new possible uses including live-work spaces, independent and assisted living residences, 
artisanal markets, artisan/makers halls, or market/food halls, arts & crafts studios or workshops, cultural centers, 
and farmers’ markets.   
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Q: What happens if the Town of Rockland chooses not to comply with the new Law?  
The State and the Attorney General’s Office have been clear that non-compliance with the MBTA Communities 
zoning law will result in the loss of critical State grant funding. Rockland is completely dependent on these 
types of grants. For FY2020 through FY2024 the Town of Rockland has received or has been allocated to 
receive $19,710,673.20 in grant funding from the State. 
Q: How does potential new development impact Rockland Residents? What is the fiscal impact of 
potential development in the zoning district?  
Although the Town has created some programming aimed at offsetting some of our local taxes and fees, some 
of Rockland’s residents are experiencing financial hardships. 
The Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities has provided $1.929 million to Rockland in blight 
grants in FY22 & FY23 with a wiating list of 35+ Rockland residents. The Rockland Sewer Department liened 
493 sewer accounts in December 2023 due to outstanding balances from FY22 and Rockland has $422,042.95 
owed in delinguint taxes for FY23. 
The redevelopment of the district has the potential to modestly grow the local economy without a significant 
impact on the Town’s existing residential neighborhoods. The goal is to deter from additional local tax increases 
as some of Rockland’s residents are currently facing economic challenges. 
New development promises new tax revenue for the Town. According to a very rough analysis of parcels in the 
new district, and using some of the fiscal impact analysis done for the Union Point parcels (approximately the 
same land area size), Rockland could expect a net revenue of between 1.6 million to 5.5 million depending on 
what is able to be built out over time.  
Q: How is this law related to the MBTA? 
The law really does not have any impact on our MBTA service or assessment fees. The Town of Rockland pays 
approximately $132,000 annually for MBTA & RTA assessments. These assessments are not elective – we are 
required to pay them.  
The law was established to address the state’s housing crisis. The purpose of the law is for the state to create a 
mechanism for multifamily housing development by-right across Massachusetts communities that are benefited 
by the MBTA services. Rockland is an MBTA-Adjacent community.  
More questions?  
Please see the Town of Rockland Planning Department Webpage for more information about the proposed 
zoning amendment, upcoming dates and events, and contact information should you have additional questions. 
Please contact Allyson Quinn, Town Planner at 781-871-0154 X1197 & aquinn@rockland-ma.gov for more 
questions or further information. See you at Town Meeting on Monday, May 6th! 
 
Scan QR code for link to the Planning Department Website with 
additional information and answers to Resident Questions from 
Community Meetings.  
