
===== PAGE 1 =====
Community Questions & Answers  
MBTA Communities Law – Zoning Compliance 
April 2024  
 
 
Resident Question: What would the increased costs to the town be from such a large 
development in Hingham Street/ Route 3 location? 
Answer: Based on data related to the Union Point Zoning that was passed by vote at Special 
Town Meeting on November 7, 2023 , and the adopted companion Map, 82% of land in the 
former Base will be restricted open space. That will result in a maximum of 1274 potential units 
at full build out. The proposed zoning for compliance with MBTA Communities law at a 
maximum build out has the potential to yield 1264 units.  
Given that there is only a 10-unit difference in total potential unit count we can use the Union 
Point data, which has Rockland specific figures, to understand the fiscal impacts with 99.215% 
confidence in accuracy. 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
The proposed MBTA Communities zoning or “MUDD” allows mixed-use development which 
required 25% of the project include commercial and 75% include residential. The graph below 
reflects that use split.  
 
Resident Question: Did the law about the location of MBTA Communities zoning requirements 
change to allow for the Park & Ride to qualify as an MBTA stop or is there now an actual MBTA 
stop located within the proposed district? 
Answer: The MBTA Communities Zoning law has new Compliance Guidelines;  
On August 10, 2022, EOHLC released Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act (the “Guidelines”). One revision was made in October 
2022. This is a summary of the second change. In response to feedback from municipal leaders 
in several MBTA communities, EOHLC is revising the Guidelines to offer MBTA communities 
a path to receive some credit for mixed-use development zoning districts. The revision also 
specifies how Section 3A compliance may affect certain discretionary grant award decisions. 
These revisions: 
1. Allow an MBTA community to “offset” the minimum multi-family unit capacity 
requirement in certain multi-family zoning district(s) by up to 25%, based on the unit 
capacity of a mixed-use zoning district that meets key requirements of Section 3A and the 
Guidelines, but for requiring a ground floor non-residential component. Such “offset” – 
only available where existing village-style or downtown development is essential to 
preserve pedestrian access to amenities – still requires a municipality to demonstrate the 
same total amount of unit capacity. 
2. Protect the financial feasibility of achieving housing goals where mixed-use zoning 
requires groundfloor non-residential uses by (i) setting forth location criteria for mixed-
use development districts and requiring that EOHLC has pre-approved the location 
before the MBTA community’s vote on its zoning changes; (ii) capping the percentage 
floor area of each development that may be required to be non-residential (ground floor 
only); (iii) requiring a broad mix of non-residential uses allowed as of right; and (iv) 
prohibiting minimum parking requirements for non-residential uses. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
3. Allow MBTA communities to locate more housing in walkable and transit-oriented 
neighborhoods without jeopardizing existing non-residential resources and amenities. 
Many MBTA communities expressed a desire to locate districts in village-style or 
downtown neighborhoods but feared that allowing multi-family housing as of right in 
those areas could risk a loss of existing businesses and buildings. Many residents 
expressed a desire to live in village-style, downtown, and transit-oriented neighborhoods.  
4. Add a list of thirteen discretionary grants programs to Section 9 to alert MBTA 
communities of additional grant programs that will consider compliance with Section 3A 
in making grant awards. These revisions to the Guidelines are intended to provide greater 
flexibility to MBTA communities to adopt new zoning districts in mixed-use 
neighborhoods, and to promote housing opportunities for residents in such 
neighborhoods. The revisions do not reduce the total unit capacity required by the 
Guidelines. 
Initially, the MAPC mapped the existing 40R “DRROD” District and enveloped that boundary 
with a proposed MBTA Communities map area.  However, an additional area was needed to 
meet minimum compliance, and the language to that expanded boundary would have to be 
changed to reduce the required Affordable Housing units ranging from 20% to 25% down to 10% 
and some additional modifications to fit those minimum requirements of compliance potentially 
requiring a change to the DRROD by Town Meeting vote and/or an approval of the MBTA 
Communities zoning. The area next to the Park & Ride had been in discussion as an option as a 
previous Planning Board proposal included that area.  
 
Modifying the DRROD, and enveloping that DRROD with the MBTA Communities compliance 
zoning was a plausible solution, however with the new Union Point zoning that meets the Union 
Street corridor, and the density allowed under the existing DRROD, plus the potential for the 

===== PAGE 4 =====
new MBTA Communities zoning along Union Street, there was some concern over intensity of 
height and use along the Union Street corridor and what those competing zoning districts might 
impose along the Union Street corridor. Additionally, without one complete DRROD 
application, there was no way to understand the effect lowering the Affordable Housing 
requirements, and potentially changing density in and/or around the DRROD might have on the 
DRROD and on our SHI. 
Working with the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals and Barrett Planning Group 
LLC, that area next to the Park & Ride became the focus as it had enough space to allow for 
higher open space requirements (50%), this area already has existing height inline with this 
proposed zoning, this area is generally far away from our small residential districts, and this area 
is next to the Park & Ride and Route 3.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resident Question: What type of evaluation was done for having a sizable manufacturing 
facility (3M) in the middle of a large residential development? 
Answer: This area is zoned as an industrial- park/hotel (H1) district. The existing structures are 
inline with that zoning. Both the Fire Department and the Building Department verified that they 
have had no complaints about odor or noise emanating from the 3M facility. Additionally, 
Rockland’s zoning bylaws include performance standards; “Manufacturing, assemblage, 
processing and storage operations that are not offensive by reason of the emission of  odor, 
fumes, dust, smoke, noise and/or vibration, or that would have a negative impact on the 
environment or conditions within the Town or adjacent towns.” 
This “MUDD”, the proposed MBTA Communities zoning compliance is only zoning and not a 
guarantee of development. In fact, given that the Town is not required to provide infrastructure 
capacity in this proposed district, development may be challenging in this area.  
