
===== PAGE 1 =====
MBTA Communities Mixed-Use Development District Amendments 
 
Article # TBD 
 
Will the Town vote to amend, Rockland Town Code, Division 3: Zoning Bylaws, Article III, 
§ 415-3 Establishment of Districts, by adding the following: 
 
Q.  MBTA Communities Mixed-Use Development District 
 
or take any other action relative thereto.  
 
Requested by: Planning Board  
 
Article # TBD 
 
Will the Town vote to amend Rockland Town Code, Division 3: Zoning Bylaws, Article III, 
§ 415-6, Intent of Classifications, by adding the following new paragraph: 
 
G. MBTA Communities Mixed-Use Development District: The purposes of this district are to 
comply with G.L. c. 40A, § 3A, known as the “MBTA Communities Law,” to encourage 
developments with a mix of uses, and to achieve other purposes as described under § 415-21.6 of 
this Bylaw.  
 
or take any other action relative thereto.  
 
Requested by: Planning Board  
 
Article # TBD 
 
Will the Town vote to amend Rockland Town Code, Division 3: Zoning Bylaws, Article III, 
§415-4, Zoning Map, to rezone a portion of the parcels in the Industrial-Hotel District to 
MBTA Communities Mixed-Use Development District as shown on a proposed Zoning Map 
on file the Town Clerk. 
 
or take any other action relative thereto.  
 
Requested by: Planning Board  
 
Article # TBD 
 
Will the Town vote amend Rockland Town Code, Division 3: Zoning Bylaws, Article XI, 
Enforcement, § 415-89, Special Permits, Subsection B(3), by inserting “and § 415-21.6, MBTA 
Communities Mixed-Use Development District after Article IX, Planned Residential 
Development for Seniors.   
 
or take any other action relative thereto.  

===== PAGE 2 =====
  
Requested by: Planning Board  
 
Article # TBD 
 
Will the Town vote to amend the Rockland Town Code, Division 3, Zoning Bylaw, Article IV, 
Permitted Uses, by adding the following new § 415-21.6.: 
 
§ 415-21.6 MBTA Communities Mixed-Use Development District 
 
A.  
Purposes 
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Mixed-Use Development District (MUDD) is to allow a 
mix of compatible residential and commercial uses in North Rockland with adequate facilities 
and services to support growth, and to address the following objectives: 
 
(1) 
Comply with the MBTA Communities Law, G.L. c. 40A, § 3A, and the Section 3A 
Compliance Guidelines of the Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities 
(EOHLC); 
(2) 
Encourage new investment in residential and nonresidential development in 
Rockland; 
(3) 
Provide for a mix of housing sizes and types and a mix of uses along Hingham Street 
to create walkable, safe environment for living and working, and to provide amenities 
for residents of the district and the Town as a whole;   
(4) 
Encourage high-quality land planning and building and site design to enhance the 
Town’s visual character and identity; 
(5) 
Create affordable housing through means other than Chapter 40B comprehensive 
permits; and 
(6) 
Increase the Town’s tax base. 
B.  
Applicability 
(1) 
The MUDD shall be as shown on the map entitled, “MBTA Communities Mixed-Use 
Development District,” dated [DATE] on file with the Town Clerk, which is hereby 
made part of the Town of Rockland Zoning Map.  
(2) 
Development in the MUDD shall comply with the use and dimensional regulations 
herein and shall not be subject to Article IV or Article V of the Zoning Bylaw except 
as provided in Subsection J below. 
C.  
Definitions. As used in this § 415-21.6, the following definitions shall apply. To the 
extent that there is any conflict between the definitions set forth herein or Article II, this § 

===== PAGE 3 =====
415-21.6 shall control. 
BREW PUB  
A restaurant selling beverages brewed on the premises in conjunction with food services.  
 
CULTURAL CENTER 
A private non-profit facility providing for display, performance, or enjoyment of heritage, 
history, or the arts, including but not limited to a museum, an art gallery, an arts 
performance venue, or interpretive site. 
 
EOHLC  
The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities.  
 
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT 
A building containing a mix of residential uses and nonresidential uses, subject to the 
provisions of Subsection I below. 
 
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING 
For purposes of this § 415-21.6, multi-family housing shall mean a dwelling with three or 
more unit or two or more buildings on the same lot, each having two or more units. 
Multi-family housing developed under this section shall not be subject to § 415-22(F).  
 
PARKING, STRUCTURED.  
A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple stories; a vehicle 
parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or a vehicle parking 
area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has a parking surface 
at least eight feet below grade. Structured parking does not include surface parking or 
carports, including solar carports. 
 
SMALL-SCALE GROCER  
As defined in 415-21.2(B), except in the MMOD, the maximum floor area shall be 
15,000 sq. ft.  
 
D.  
Permitted Principal Uses 
(1) 
Residential Uses  
(a) Assisted living residence  
(b) Independent living residence 
(c) Live/workspace 
(d) Multi-family housing 
(2) 
Commercial Uses 

===== PAGE 13 =====
M.  
Planning Board MUDD Rules and Regulation. 
The Planning Board shall adopt reasonable administrative MUDD Rules and Regulations to 
implement this § 415-21.6. The Rules and Regulations shall prescribe the form and contents of a 
complete Application for MUDD Site Plan Approval, including filing fees and technical review 
fees under G.L. c. 44, § 53G, as well as any plans, specifications, and reports required for the 
Applicant to demonstrate § 415-21.6 compliance and compliance with any other applicable 
provisions of this Bylaw. The Rules and Regulations shall be on file with the Town Clerk and 
Director of Planning and Development.  
 
N.  
Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the Planning Board’s decision may appeal to the 
Superior Court, the Land Court, or other court of competent jurisdiction within 20 days 
after the MUDD Site Plan Approval decision has been filed with the Town Clerk. 
O.  
Modifications to Approved Site Plans 
(1) 
Minor Change. After MUDD Site Plan Approval, an Applicant may apply to make 
minor changes involving minor utility or building orientation adjustments, or minor 
adjustments to parking or other site details that do not affect the overall buildout of 
the site, or provision of open space, number of housing units, or affordable housing. A 
change of 5 percent or less in the number of housing units in a Development shall 
constitute a minor change. Minor changes must be submitted to the Planning Board in 
accordance with the Planning Board’s MUDD Rules and Regulations and shall 
include redlined prints of the Approved Plan. The Planning Board may authorize the 
proposed changes at any regularly scheduled meeting without the need to hold a 
public hearing. The Planning Board issue a written decision to approve or deny the 
minor changes and provide a copy to the Applicant for filing with the Town Clerk. 
(2) 
Major Change. Changes deemed by the Planning Board to constitute a major change 
in an Approved Development because of the nature of the change or because the 
change cannot be appropriately characterized as a minor change under Subsection 
N(1) above shall be processed by the Planning Board as a new Application for 
MUDD Site Plan Approval under § 415-21.6. 
P.  
Design Guidelines 
The Planning Board may adopt Advisory Design Guidelines for Development in the Mixed-Use 
Development District and shall file a copy with the Town Clerk. The Guidelines are not 
mandatory, but the Planning Board may consider them in reviewing an application under this § 
415-21.6 and may ask the Applicant for plan modifications to better incorporate one or more 
components of the Guidelines. In the event of any conflict between § 415-21.6 and the Design 
Guidelines, § 415-21.6 shall control. 
 
 And, further, to authorize the Town Clerk and/or Town/Land Use Counsel to make any 
clerical, numerical, or other non-substantive changes to the final text in order to 
incorporate this new bylaw section into the Rockland Town Code in an orderly and 
appropriate manner, or take any other action relative thereto.  

===== PAGE 14 =====
 
Requested by: Planning Board  
 
  
Explanation: The Planning Board is proposing an update to the Town’s Zoning Code, to 
create a new mixed-use zoning district, to be compliant with the MBTA Communities Law, 
G.L. c. 40A, § 3A, and the Section 3A Compliance Guidelines of the Executive Office of 
Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC); 
 
