
===== PAGE 1 =====
MBTA Communities Law | Commonly asked Questions 
Q: What is the “MBTA Communities Law”? 
The MBTA Communities law is a new state law that passed in 2021 as part of the Housing 
Choice Initiative ann Economic Development Bond Bill.  
Q: What is the purpose of the new state law?  
The purpose of the new state law is to address the state’s housing crisis, encourage multifamily 
housing development and boost the state’s housing supply.  
Q: Where is the new zoning district located?  
 Rockland’s Planning Board has put forward a proposed amendment to the Town’s zoning that 
would create a new zoning district “MUDD” that would make the Town of Rockland compliant 
with new State law. The new zoning district is located near the park n ride station by the 
Hingham Town Line. The proposed zoning district includes 60.5 developable acres, roughly 10 
more than the minimum requirement of the State law. This additional agreage was included after 
consideration of how to retain openspace and the potential for how zoning could address the 
need to mitigate on-site water and sewer engineering needs without compromising open space 
and could design. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Q: How does this impact our sewer capacity? How does this impact our water supply?  
This law does NOT  require communities to pay for infrastructure to support the zoning district. 
All sewer and water infrastructure requirements will need to be mitigated onsite by private 
development. The Town and their departments are not required to provide upgrades to 
accommodate the new district.  
Q: Do developers get to circumvent local zoning or environmental protections in this 
district?  
The  proposed new zoning district, does NOT overide the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act 
or Title V of the Massachusetts Environmental Code and does NOT provide options for waivers 
or exemptions. 
Q: What types of development is allowable in the new district?  
The proposed zoning district is required to allow multifamily housing development “by-right”. 
Additionally, the zoning identifies new possible uses including live-work spaces, independent 
and assisted living residences, artisanal markets, artisan/makers halls, or market/food halls, arts 
& crafts studios or workshops, cultural centers, and farmers’ markets.   
Q: What happens if the Town of Rockland chooses not to comply with the new Law?  
The State and the Attorney General’s Office have been clear that non-compliance with the MBTA 
Communities zoning law will result in the loss of critical State grant funding. Rockland is 
completely dependent on these types of grants. For FY2020 through FY2024 the Town of 
Rockland has received or has been allocated to receive $19,710,673.20 in grant funding from the 
State. 
Q: How does potential new development impact Rockland Residents? What is the fiscal 
impact of potential development in the zoning district?  
Although the Town has created some programming aimed at offsetting some of our local taxes 
and fees, some of Rockland’s residents are experiencing financial hardships. 
The Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities has provided $1.929 million to 
Rockland in blight grants in FY22 & FY23 with a wiating list of 35+ Rockland residents. The 
Rockland Sewer Department liened 493 sewer accounts in December 2023 due to outstanding 
balances from FY22 and Rockland has $422,042.95 owed in delinguint taxes for FY23. 
The redevelopment of the district has the potential to modestly grow the local economy without a 
significant impact on the Town’s existing residential neighborhoods. The goal is to deter from 
additional local tax increases as some of Rockland’s residents are currently facing economic 
challenges. 
New development promises new tax revenue for the Town. According to a very rough analysis of 
parcels in the new district, and using some of the fiscal impact analysis done for the Union Point 
parcels (approximately the same land area size), Rockland could expect a net revenue of between 
1.6 million to 5.5 million depending on what is able to be built out over time.  
