
===== PAGE 9 =====
Town of Seekonk 
 
FA L L T O W N M E E T I N G 
 
 
 
 
 
   N O V E M B E R 1 8 , 2 0 2 4
 
 
 
 
Page 8 
 
Speakers: David Andrade, Allen Ave; Sandy Foulkes, Arcade Ave; Doreen Taylor, Forsythe Circle; Paul Coutu, 
Donald Lewis Dr; Gary Miller, Brookhill Dr; Ann Miller, West River St; Tom Benoit, Ferncliffe Rd; Matthew 
Tortolani Peep Toad, Ct, Dan Preston, Newman Ave; William Orstendorf, Brookside Ct; Richard Wallace, 
Woodward Ave, Mike Mullen, Robincrest Dr; Dennis O'Brien, Pheasant Ridge Rd. 
 
A motion was made by Tom Benoit, Ferncliffe Road, to amend 5th line, assessor map 14, to change 
to “active and/or passive recreation purposes” which can be changed at a future meeting. Town 
Counsel, Attorney Joseph Fair, stated for when dealing with general municipal purposes is for all 
municipal purposes. Changing the article verbiage will make it more restrictive and is out of scope. 
Mr. Benoit asked if the Town could put anything on the lot, i.e. salt shed, without coming to town 
meeting. Town Administrator, Shawn Cadime, answered town meeting is required to appropriate 
funds.  
 
Town Moderator stated the amendment was out of order/out of scope.  
 
Action on Motion: Motion passed (271Y,18N, 0A) (2/3rd vote) 
 
ARTICLE 11 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of Seekonk, Massachusetts by 
inserting the following new or amended language as follows:  
 
Amendment 1: 
Section 6.6 Multifamily Development Overlay District 
Amend Section 6.6 Multifamily Development Overlay District as follows: 
 
 
 
Motion 10: 
Move that the Town appropriate $6,970,000 to pay costs to acquire, pursuant to G.L. c. 
61B, §9, by donation, purchase, eminent domain or otherwise, the Firefly Golf Course, 
being land located at 320 and 322 Fall River Avenue, and 763 and 769 Arcade Avenue, 
consisting of approximately 55 acres, identified as all of Lots 78, 100 and 101 on Seekonk 
Assessor Map 14, and to acquire portions of Lot 96 on said Assessor Map 14, for general 
municipal purposes, and for the payment of any and all other costs incidental and related 
thereto, and that to meet this appropriation, the Treasurer, with the approval of the Select 
Board, is authorized to borrow said amount under and pursuant to G.L. c. 44, §7(1), or 
any other enabling authority, and to issue bonds or notes of the Town therefor, and to 
authorize the Board of Selectmen to execute deeds and/or other instruments and take any 
other action needed to effectuate the vote taken hereunder.   

===== PAGE 10 =====
Town of Seekonk 
 
FA L L T O W N M E E T I N G 
 
 
 
 
 
   N O V E M B E R 1 8 , 2 0 2 4
 
 
 
Page 9 
6.6 
     Multifamily Development Overlay District 
6.6.1 
    Purpose 
The purpose of this Section, Multifamily Development Overlay District 
(MDOD), is to provide allow for the development of multifamily housing 
development in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, § 3A, and  protect the 
value of real property; to promote more sensitive siting of buildings and 
better overall site planning; to allow landowners a reasonable return on 
their investment; to facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, 
utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient manner; 
and to promote the development of varied housing opportunities  
through the production of a variety of housing sizes and types to create 
housing for people with a variety of needs and income levels. 
 
6.6.2 
     Overlay District 
Establishment of District 
The MDOD is shown on the map entitled, Multifamily Overlay District, 
and dated November 18, 2024, on file with the Town Clerk and the 
Seekonk Zoning Map.  
 
The MDOD is an overlay district superimposed on all underlying zoning 
districts. All uses permitted by right or by special permit in the pertinent 
underlying zoning district shall be similarly permitted in the MDOD 
subject to the provisions of this Section.  Where the MDOD authorizes 
uses and dimensional controls not otherwise allowed in the underlying 
district, the provisions of the MDOD shall control as related to those 
uses.  Uses and dimensional controls of the MDOD are not subject to any 
special permit requirements of the underlying district and/or applicable 
overlay districts. 
 
6.6.3 
     Minimum Area 
The parcel or set of contiguous parcels containing the MDOD shall not 
be less than forty (40) acres, all of which shall be located exclusively in 
the Town of Seekonk. Minimum parcel lot size, setbacks and dimensional 
requirements within the MDOD shall conform to the underlying primary 
zoning district as set forth in Section 5.1.4.   
 
6.6.4 
     Multifamily Development Project 
Within the MDOD, a Multifamily Development Project (MDP), which 
includes Multi-family development or Multi-family housing, both as 
defined under M.G.L. c. 40A, may be constructed as of right, upon site 
plan approval, in accordance with the Town of Seekonk Zoning Bylaw 
Section 2.8.  Uses allowed as of right in the MDOD shall not be 

===== PAGE 11 =====
Town of Seekonk 
 
FA L L T O W N M E E T I N G 
 
 
 
 
 
   N O V E M B E R 1 8 , 2 0 2 4
 
 
 
 
Page 10 
unreasonably conditioned or denied as part of Site Plan Review.    as 
set forth below.  Multifamily Development in the MDOD shall meet all of 
the standards set forth in this By-law section to the maximum extent 
practicable. 
 
6.6.5 
     Procedures 
 
 
An applicant for site plan approval of a MDP shall file with the Planning 
Board six (6) copies of a Development Plan substantially conforming to 
the requirements for a preliminary subdivision plan under the 
Subdivision Regulations of the Planning Board site plan in accordance 
with Section 2.8.  Such plan shall also include: 
… 
6.6.5.3 
   Unless the development is to be sewered, the results of deep soil test pits 
and percolation tests.  The Planning Board shall refer data on proposed 
wastewater disposal to the Board of Health for their review and comment 
on wastewater issues recommendation 
6.6.5.4      
Specifications demonstrating that access roads and drainage facilities shall meet the  
functional requirements of the Planning Board’s Rules and Regulations. to the maximum 
extent possible.  
6.6.5.5 
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.8.5, the applicant shall not 
be required to submit the parking a site plan otherwise required therein. 
… 
6.6.6 
       Dwelling Units Development Standards 
The following standards shall govern dwellings and dwelling 
unitsdevelopment within the MDOD: 
6.6.6.1 
      Density: The maximum number of units allowed in a MDP shall be the 
greater of a) the total area of the subject property in square feet divided 
by 10,000 sq. ft. or b) the total upland area of the subject property in 
square feet divided by 5,000 sq. ft.  Upland area “shall mean land not 
regulated by the provisions of G.L.C. 131 S.40 as protected resource 
area.  The unit count of (a) in excess of (b) or (b) in excess of (a) will be 
constructed as 55 and over units.  The maximum permitted density within 
the MDOD shall be 15 units per developable acre.  Developable acreage 
shall exclude all jurisdictional wetlands and unsuitable soils and shall be 
documented by the applicant.    
6.6.6.2 
      Buildings: No individual structure within a MDP shall contain more than 
forty-eight (48) dwelling units, unless a special permit for more dwelling 
units is granted by the Planning Board. 
