
===== PAGE 1 =====
Sharon MBTA Communities Law Frequently Asked Questions 
Question 
Response 
What is the 
MBTA 
Communities 
Law? 
The “MBTA Communities Law,” or Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, 
Section 3A, was passed in January 2021 by the Legislature. The Law requires 
communities with or adjacent to MBTA service to create a zone of reasonable 
size for multifamily construction by right with a minimum gross density of 15 
units per acre. The district must be located not more than ½ mile from a transit 
station (where applicable. The district must have no restrictions on unit size, 
number of bedrooms, size of bedrooms, or number of occupants. It must be 
able to support a certain number of units, proportional to the type and 
population of the community. 
 
Sharon is classiﬁed as a “Commuter Rail Community” by the Executive Ofﬁce of 
Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC). It is required to zone a district of 
50 acres, with at least 40 percent of the district within ½ mile of the commuter 
rail station. This district must allow for at least 987 units in the Town, with a 
minimum density of 15 units per acre.  The deadline for Sharon to comply with 
the law is December 31, 2024. 
 
Current update 
on the 
development of 
Zoning 
 
The Town contemplates a MBTA Communities Multi-family and Mixed-Use 
Overlay District (MCMMOD) with two subdistricts in the town center. 
Subdistrict 1 includes selected parcels from the General Residence District. 
Subdistrict 2 includes selected parcels from the Business A District. See the 
map on page three for locations. Subdistrict 1 would require a maximum lot 
coverage of 40 percent on each parcel, and up to four stories. Subdistrict 2 
would also allow four stories, with up to 60 percent lot coverage.  JM Goldson 
is currently working with the Town on community outreach and education for 
the proposed overlay district. 
 
Why must 
Sharon comply 
with this law? 
 
Cities and towns that do not comply with the new requirements will be 
ineligible for the following state funding programs (subject to change).  Sharon 
has taken advantage of several of these funding programs in the past.  
1. MassWorks 
2. The Housing Choice Initiative 
3. Local Capital Projects Fund 
4. Community Planning Grants, EOHLC 
5. Massachusetts Downtown Initiative, EOED 
6. Urban Agenda, EOED 
7. Rural and Small-Town Development Fund, EOED 
8. Brownﬁelds Redevelopment Fund, MassDevelopment 
9. Site Readiness Program, MassDevelopment 
10. Underutilized Properties Program, MassDevelopment 
11. Collaborative Workspace Program, MassDevelopment 
12. Real Estate Services Technical Assistance, MassDevelopment 
13. Commonwealth Places Programs, MassDevelopment 
14. Land Use Planning Grants, EOEEA 
15. Local Acquisitions for Natural Diversity (LAND) Grants, EOEEA 

===== PAGE 2 =====
16. Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness (MVP) Planning and Project 
Grants, EOEEA 
 
In March 2023, State Attorney General Campbell clariﬁed that failure to 
comply may result in civil enforcement action or liability under federal and 
state fair housing laws, e.g., the state will sue municipalities that do not comply. 
Further, the Ofﬁce of Attorney General has stated: “MBTA Communities 
cannot avoid their obligations under the Law merely by foregoing state 
funding; the Law requires that MBTA Communities “shall have” a compliant 
zoning district and does not provide any mechanism by which a town or city 
may opt out of this requirement”. MBTA Communities that fail to comply with 
the Law’s requirements risk liability under federal and state fair housing laws. 
 
Where will the 
new zoning be 
located? 
 
 
Billings St 
North Main St 
Sharon Train Station 

===== PAGE 3 =====
How does this 
requirement ﬁt into 
Sharon’s Master Plan 
and Housing 
Production Plan? 
 
The intention of the law is for all communities in the metro area to share 
in the creation of diverse housing options. By working jointly over time 
to create more housing, the region can begin to address its dire 
affordability issues as the aggregate increase in housing stock releases 
pressure in the housing market over the long term.  
 
The three stated goals for the Imagine Sharon 2019 Master Plan were: 
1. Support and encourage mixed-use development in appropriate 
areas in town (e.g., Post Ofﬁce Square, Cobbs Corner, Shaw’s 
Plaza, and the Heights Plaza area).  
2. Promote and allow housing types for aging in community, 
especially options that foster community and intergenerational 
connections in walkable neighborhoods with access to services 
and shops. 
3. Create green and sustainable housing, including mixed-use 
options and walkable locations in close proximity to shops and 
services.  
 
Stated goals from the Housing Production Plan (2018-2023) include: 
1. “Seek opportunities to promote housing development near the 
train station and downtown, in mixed-use areas…” 
2. “Encourage affordable housing development to achieve, exceed, 
and maintain the Chapter40B 10% goal…within all zoning 
districts.”  
3. “Continue to build upon…the “Sharon Commons Smart Growth 
Overlay District” (Chapter 40R) zoning by considering other 
potentially appropriate locations for other Chapter 40R 
districts…” 
 
Complying with the law will bring Sharon closer to these goals.  
 
Can we zone for mixed 
use in our town center 
to maintain our town 
center character? 
 
• Sharon is proposing to continue to allow mixed-use in the Town 
Center, as well as expand the allowed uses to include multi-
family. 
• Districts that require ONLY mixed use cannot be counted as a 
3A MBTA Communities district. 
 
What if the Town 
wants to see 
affordable housing or 
age-restricted housing 
built? Will we be 
forcing these sorts of 
developments out? 
No, the law only requires that the zoning overlay we create allows for 
building multi-family housing. A developer could still build affordable 
housing, age-restricted housing for seniors, or a building with all studios, 
etc. Sharon is not allowed to restrict the zoning to only allow for age-
restricted housing.  
 
Sharon is proposing to require 10% of units in developments of 10 units 
or greater to be deed-restricted and affordable to households making 
80% of the area median income.  Any higher percentages of affordability 
are not allowed without further study and approvals by EOHLC. 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
How will this affect 
open space, 
recreation, wetlands, 
educational or other 
protected lands? 
 
One of the general principles of the Law is to “minimize impacts to 
sensitive land.” Many categories of land where it is not possible or 
practical to construct multi-family housing are speciﬁcally “excluded” 
from consideration under the MBTA Communities Requirement.  These 
include:  
• All publicly owned land, except for lots or portions of lots 
determined to be developable public land,  
• All rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and other surface waterbodies,  
• All wetland resources areas, together with a buffer zone around 
wetlands and waterbodies equivalent to the minimum setback 
required by Title 5 of the state environmental code,  
• Protected open space and recreational land that is legally 
protected in perpetuity (for example, land owned by a local land 
trust or subject to a conservation restriction),  
• Land likely to remain undeveloped due to functional or 
traditional use (for example, cemeteries),  
• All public rights-of-way and private rights-of-way,  
• Privately owned land on which development is prohibited to 
protect private or public water supplies, including but not limited 
to Zone I wellhead protection areas and Zone A surface water 
supply protection areas, and,  
• Privately owned land for educational or institutional uses, such 
as a hospital, prison, electric, water, wastewater or other utility, 
museum, or private school. 
 
Furthermore, Sharon has proposed the overlay district be located away 
from the Groundwater Protection Overlay District and other sensitive 
land, despite this area being closer to the commuter rail station. 
 
Will the MBTA 
Communities 
Requirement result in 
the creation of 
affordable housing? 
 
• There are no express requirements for affordable housing.  
• However, a maximum of 10 percent of the dwellings can be 
required to be affordable for as-of-right multi-family in MBTA 
3A compliance districts. The cap on income of families or 
individuals eligible to occupy the affordable units cannot be less 
than 80 percent of the area median income.  
• Sharon proposes projects in the MCMMOD reserve 10 percent 
of units as affordable housing; Any requirements above 10 
percent for as-of-right construction in the Town’s designated 
MBTA zoning district would require an additional economic 
feasibility study and approval by EOHLC. 
 
Are we required to 
construct a public 
sewer system to 
support higher-
density housing?  If so, 
how can we pay for 
that?   
No.  Sharon’s requirement is only to adopt the zoning. Multi-family 
housing can be created at the required density using private septic and 
wastewater treatment systems that meet state environmental 
standards.  It is not the Town’s responsibility to provide water and sewer 
infrastructure to support private development.  

===== PAGE 5 =====
Could the MBTA 
multi-family overlay 
district increase 
trafﬁc?   
Site Plan Review of a speciﬁc multi-family project proposal will look at 
vehicular access and circulation on the site and allow for the 
incorporation of conditions to help mitigate impacts. 
I am concerned that 
new multi-family 
housing will mean 
more children in the 
school system.  What 
can we do?   
 
The new law does not require immediate housing production—only 
creating compliant zoning districts where multi-family housing may be 
made as of right.  It is unlikely that Sharon will see a rapid increase in 
school attendance, given the time needed to assemble land for 
development, design, and build housing.  This only happens if current 
property owners agree. Additionally, any development would need space 
for a shared septic system, which is a development constraint.  Sharon’s 
existing MUOD allows for up to 20 units an acre and has not seen any 
sizable redevelopment in the past decade. 
 
Moreover, an analysis from the Boston region’s Metropolitan Area 
Planning Council has found no meaningful connection between housing 
production rates and enrollment growth.  
 
How will the new 
zoning affect property 
rights? 
Zoning allows for what might be built on a parcel, but property owners 
remain the sole decision-makers. Any changes in the Town’s built 
environment will be the sole result of property owners making that 
choice. No one will be required to build because of the new zoning.  
Additionally, the proposed zoning would not increase assessed taxes on 
any included parcel but may increase the properties’ market value. 
 
How can I provide 
input? 
 
The Town of Sharon has contracted with planning consulting ﬁrm JM 
Goldson LLC to engage the local community in discussing the 
contemplated amendments. The Town encourages community feedback 
on the process.  
 
The Planning Board is holding two information sessions on Tuesday, 
February 13th, 2024, and Tuesday, March 12th, 2024. Both will be held 
from 7pm to 8:30pm at the Sharon Community Center (219 Massapoag 
Ave) with the same content. Virtual attendance is available. Additional 
information is available on the town website and social media. 
 
Additional Resources 
 
• Mass.gov website for MBTA Communities: 
https://www.mass.gov/info-details/multi-family-zoning-
requirement-for-mbta-communities  
• Webinar series on MBTA Communities requirement: 
https://www.mhp.net/news/2022/register-for-mhps-mbta-
community-webinar-series  
• Guidelines for MBTA Communities: 
https://www.mass.gov/info-details/section-3a-guidelines  
• FAQs on MBTA Communities requirement: 
https://www.mass.gov/info-details/resources-for-mbta-
communities#3a-fact-sheets- 
 
