
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
Warrant Article- MBTA Multi-family Overlay District Bylaw 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Sherborn Bylaws by adding 
section  240-5.7 Multi-family Overlay District (MOD), amend Section 
240-9.1 attachment 2 Sherborn’s Zoning Map  and  amend any other 
associated sections, where applicable, or act in any other manner in 
relation thereto as listed below: 
 
Section 240-5.7 Multi-family Overlay District 
A. Purpose. The Purpose of the Multi-family Overlay District (MOD) is to allow up to 6 
acres of multi-family housing at a density of 15 units per acre as of right per Section 
3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning 
provides for as of right multi-family housing to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1) Promote public health, safety and welfare by encouraging the production 
of various housing sizes and types to provide equal access to new 
housing throughout the community to meet the various needs for people 
and households of all incomes, ages and sizes. 
(2) Preserve open space in a community by locating new housing within or 
adjacent to existing developed areas and infrastructure. 
(3) Increase the municipal tax base through private investment in new 
residential developments. 
B. Establishment and Applicability. This MOD is an overlay district superimposed 
over the underlying zoning district and is shown on the Zoning Map. 
(1) Applicability of MOD. An applicant may develop up to six acres of multi-
family housing within an MOD per the provisions of Section 240-5.7. 
(2) Maximum extent. The total maximum area of land that may be 
developed for multi-family housing at the by right density of 15 units per 
acre shall not exceed 6 acres within the MOD. Once the Planning Board 
has granted Site Plan Approval for a project or projects having a 
combined total area of 6 acres, no further development for multi-family 
housing at the by right density shall be allowed. No project shall be 
allowed that would result in development of more than a combined total 
of six acres for multi-family housing at the by right density with the MOD.  
(3) Underlying Zoning. The MOD is an overlay district superimposed on 
underlying zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all 
other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing the respective underlying 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except for uses allowed as of 
right in the MOD. Uses not identified in Section 240-5.7 are governed by 
the underlying zoning district(s) requirements. 
(4) Density Protection.  
(a) No other provision or requirements in the Zoning Bylaw shall reduce 
the effective density of a multi-family housing project below 15 units 
per acre within the MOD. 
(b) The Planning Board shall have the authority to waive or modify any 
conflicting dimensional or design standards imposed by other 
sections of the Zoning Bylaw if such standards would result in a 
reduction of the base density of 15 units per acre for multi-family 
housing within the MOD.  
C. Definitions. For Section 240-5.7, the following definitions shall apply. See Section 
240-1.5 of the Zoning Bylaws for all other definitions.  
(1) Affordable Unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use 
restriction recorded in is chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or 
limiting occupancy to an individual or household of a specified 
income, or both. 
(2) Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units eligible 
for listing in the EOHLC’s Subsidized Housing Inventory. 
(3) Applicant. A person, or organization that applies for a building permit, 
Site Plan Review, or Special Permit. 
(4) Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the 
Boston-Cambridge-Quincy- MA-NH HUD metropolitan statistical 
region that includes the Town of Sherborn as defined by the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(5) As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place 
at the time of application without needing a special permit, variance, 
zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary zoning approval. 
(6) Building coverage. The maximum area of the lot can be attributed to 
the footprint of the buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. 
Building Coverage does not include surface parking. 
(7) Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-family 
Zoning Districts Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised 
or amended by EOHLC from time to time. 
(8) EOHLC. The Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities 
(formerly Department of Housing and Community Development, also 
known as DHCD) or any successor agency. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
(9) Development Standards. Provisions of Section 240-5.7 F General 
Development Standards made applicable to projects within the 
MOD. 
(10) 
MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
(11) 
Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential 
dwelling units or two or more buildings on  the same lot with more 
than one residential dwelling unit in each building. 
(12) 
Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either as a base 
district or an overlay district, in which multi-family housing is allowed 
as of right. 
(13) 
Open space. Contiguous undeveloped land within a parcel 
boundary. 
(14) 
Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built 
structure above the space. A solar panel designed to be installed 
above a surface parking space does not count as a built structure for 
this definition. 
(15) 
Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, 
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including 
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and 
sanitation.  
(16) 
Section 3A. Section 3A of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts 
General Laws. 
(17) 
Site plan review authority. The Planning Board is responsible 
for Site plan review within the MOD. 
(18) 
Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified 
Affordable Housing Units maintained by the EOHLC used to measure 
a community’s stock of low-or-moderate-income housing for M.G.L. 
Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law. 
D. Permitted Uses. 
(1) Uses Permitted As of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right 
within the MOD. See Section 240-3 of the Zoning Bylaws for all other uses 
allowed as of right in the underlying zones.  
a. Multi-family housing, up to 15 units per acre, up to six acres. 
(2) Accessory Uses.  The following uses are considered accessory as of right 
to any of the permitted uses in Section D. 
a. Parking, including surface parking on the same lot as the principal 
use. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
b. As of right accessory uses appropriate to the above permitted 
uses per 240 Article III  of the Zoning Bylaws for uses allowed as a 
right or special permit in the underlying zones.  
E. Dimensional Standards 
(1) Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary in this Zoning Bylaw, the dimensional requirements applicable in 
the MOD are as follows: 
 
(2) Multi-Building Lots. In the MOD, lots may have more than one principal 
building. 
(3) Exceptions. The limitation on height of buildings shall not apply to 
chimneys, ventilators, towers, silos, spires, or other ornamental features 
of buildings, which features are in no way used for living purposes and do 
not constitute more than 25% of the ground floor area of the building. 
 
F. Off-Street Parking 
These parking requirements apply to development in the MOD. Number of parking 
spaces. The following minimum numbers of off-street parking spaces shall be permitted 
by use: 
Standard 
 
Lot Size 
 
Minimum (SF) 
 10,000 
Additional Lot Square Footage 
by Dwelling Unit (SF) 
 1,000 
Height(2) 
 
Stories (Maximum) 
  2.5 
Feet (Maximum) 
  35 
Minimum Open Space 
 25%  
Maximum Building Coverage 
  50% 
Setbacks 
 
Minimum Frontage (ft) 
 50 
Front Setback (ft) 
 20 
Side Setback (ft) 
 10 feet if abutting business use only; 30 
feet if abutting residential 
Rear Setback (ft) 
 10 feet if abutting business use only; 30 
feet if abutting residential 

===== PAGE 9 =====
J. Severability 
If any provision of this Section 240-5.7 is found to be invalid by a court of competent 
jurisdiction, the remainder of Section 240- 5.7 shall not be affected but shall remain in 
full force. The invalidity of any provision of this Section 240- 5.7 shall not affect the 
validity of the remainder of Sherborn’s Zoning Bylaw. 
Section 240-9.1 attachment 2 Sherborn’s Zoning Map  

===== PAGE 10 =====
Sherborn MBTA Communities MOD Zoning - Overview 
Map 
