
===== PAGE 1 =====
November 13, 2025 Town Meeting Minutes 
 
Page 1 of 13 
 
 
 
THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 
TOWN OF STERLING 
November 3, 2025 adjourned to November 13, 2025 
SPECIAL TOWN MEETING MINUTES 
  
 
At 6:50 pm, on Monday, November 3, the Town Moderator, Richard Lane, addressed the 
Special Town Meeting held at the Chocksett Middle School, 40 Boutelle Road in said Town of 
Sterling.  After consultation with the Select Board and Town Counsel, he determined the need 
to adjourn the meeting until November 13, 2025 when the place and facilities are sufficient to 
accommodate all voters attending the meeting.  MGL Chapter 39 § 10 
At 6:30 pm, on Thursday, November 13, the Town Moderator, Richard Lane, reconvened the 
Special Town Meeting held at the Chocksett Middle School, 40 Boutelle Road in said Town of 
Sterling.  There was a quorum present; 620 voters attended the meeting. 
Fire Lieutenant Tom Kokernack briefed the legislative body on how to respond should an 
emergency arise during the meeting.  
The Moderator, asked all to rise for the Pledge of Allegiance. 
In accordance with MGL Chapter 39 Sections 10 & 14, the moderator appointed assistant 
moderators for the meeting.  Mike Pineo and Linda Woodland were in the Chocksett Cafeteria, 
Ben Cheslawski and Pat Fox were in the Houghton Cafeteria, and Bill Caldwell assisted the 
Moderator in the gymnasium. 
Town Moderator, Richard Lane reviewed logistics of participation including use and testing of the 
vote counting devices, and how to address the meeting.   
 
The Moderator began by calling for a vote on the long-standing history to dispense of the reading 
of the Warrant. 
Motion made to waive with the reading of the Warrant and the Constable’s return. 
Motion passed by majority as declared by the Moderator. 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
November 13, 2025 Town Meeting Minutes 
 
Page 2 of 13 
 
 
ARTICLE 1: MULTI-FAMILY OVERLAY DISTRICT (MFOD) 
Motion made that the Town will vote to amend its Protective Bylaws, Chapter 301, Article 4, Special 
Regulations, to add a new Section 301.4.10, titled “Multi-Family Overlay District (MFOD), to create a 
zoning overlay district which will allow multi-family housing as required by Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
(MGL c. 40A), and  to amend the Zoning Map of the Town of Sterling, Massachusetts (revised August 3, 
1995, and May 5, 2025).  MAJORITY VOTE 
Stephen Wallace, Town Planner, presented the Article. 
Section 301-4.7 – Multi-Family Overlay District (MFOD) 
A. Purpose 
The purpose of the MFOD is to allow multi-family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of 
the Zoning Act (MGL Chapter 40A). This zoning allows for as of right multi-family housing in an attempt 
to encourage the production of a variety of housing types that will provide equal access to new housing 
for people with a variety of needs and income levels. 
B. Establishment and Applicability 
The MFOD is an overlay zoning district having a land area of approximately 11.7 acres that is 
superimposed over the Rural Residential District (RRD) as shown on the Town’s official Zoning Map. 
B.1 – Applicability of MFOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within the MFOD in 
accordance with the provisions of this section (4.10). 
B.2 – Underlying Zoning. The MFOD is an overlay zoning district superimposed on the underlying Rural 
Residential District (RRD). The regulations for use, dimensions, and all other provisions of the Zoning 
Bylaw governing the RRD shall remain in effect. Uses that are not identified in this Section are governed 
by the requirements of the underlying zoning district (RRD). 
C. Definitions 
For purposes of this Section[x], the following definitions shall apply. 
C.1. Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded in its chain 
of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or household of a specified 
income, or both. 
C.2. Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this Section [x]. 
C.3. Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a Building Permit, Site Plan Review, or 
Special Permit. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
November 13, 2025 Town Meeting Minutes 
 
Page 3 of 13 
 
C.4. Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan statistical region that 
includes the Town of Sterling, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD). 
C.5. As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of application without 
the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary zoning 
approval. 
C.6. Building coverage. The maximum area of the lot that can be attributed to the footprint of the 
buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building Coverage does not include surface parking. 
C.7. EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities, or any successor 
agency. 
C.8. Development standards. Provisions of Section 4.10, G. General Development Standards made 
applicable to projects within the MFOD. 
C.9. Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or more 
buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building. 
C.10. Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay district, in which 
multi-family housing is allowed as of right. 
C.11. Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple stories; a 
vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or a vehicle parking area 
that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has a parking surface at least eight feet 
below grade. Structured Parking does not include surface parking or carports, including solar carports. 
C.12. Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. A solar 
panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a built structure for the 
purposes of this definition. 
C.13. Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or 
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
C.14. Section 3A. Section 3A of General Laws, Chapter 40A, the Zoning Act. 
C.15. Site Plan Review Authority. The Planning Board is the Site Plan Review authority. 
C.16. Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units maintained by 
EOHLC used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate-income housing for the purposes of 
M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law. 
D. Permitted Uses 

===== PAGE 4 =====
November 13, 2025 Town Meeting Minutes 
 
Page 4 of 13 
 
In addition to all other uses allowed by right in the Rural Residential District, multi-family housing shall 
also be allowed by right in the MFOD. 
E. Dimensional Standards 
The following dimensional standards shall apply to the MFOD: 
E.1. Minimum lot size: none. 
E.2. Maximum density: no more than 15 units per acre. 
E.3. Minimum frontage requirement: 50 feet. 
E.4. Front yard setbacks: a minimum of 40 feet. 
E.5. Side yard setbacks: a minimum of 25 feet. 
E.6. Rear yard setbacks: a minimum of 25 feet. 
E.7. Minimum setback distances for freestanding accessory buildings: a minimum of 10 feet from all lot 
lines. 
E.8. Maximum height – 48 feet (4 stories) 
F. Open Space 
Multi-family development projects in the MFOD shall set aside thirty-three percent (33%) of the total 
project area as permanently protected open space, of which 40% must be contiguous open space. 
G. Parking, Driveways & Interior Roadways 
The following standards shall apply to the MFOD: 
G.1. One parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. 
G.2. No parking area shall contain more than 16 parking spaces. All parking areas shall be connected to 
the structures by walkways. 
G.3. All parking areas shall conform to the design requirements set forth in § 301-3.2.4; and all parking 
areas, loading areas, and refuse disposal areas shall conform to the landscaping requirements set forth 
in § 301-3.2.6. Buffer areas shall be retained in their natural vegetative state to the maximum extent 
feasible. 
G.4. There shall be adequate sight distance from the driveway and along the roadway in both directions 
to maneuver safely in and out of roadway traffic. The DPW Superintendent may require a licensed 
engineer to certify that there is adequate sight distance in both directions along the roadway. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
November 13, 2025 Town Meeting Minutes 
 
Page 5 of 13 
 
G.5. Interior roads and utilities shall provide service functionally equivalent to that assured individual 
lots under the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules and Regulations. 
H. Exterior Lighting 
H.1. Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be cut-off type, mounted no higher than 15 feet, and oriented and 
shielded to avoid glare on adjoining properties. 
H.2. Plantings or other screening shall be used to block headlight glare from drives and parking lots onto 
adjoining premises. 
H.3. No buildings shall be floodlit. 
I. Site Plan Review 
All development plans proposed for the MFOD shall be subject to Site Plan Review by the Planning 
Board. The Site Plan Review process may regulate the use, but shall not be used as a mechanism to deny 
the use. 
 
 

===== PAGE 6 =====
November 13, 2025 Town Meeting Minutes 
 
Page 6 of 13 
 
Submitted by:   
Select Board 
Recommendations:  
Select Board recommended approval 
 
 
 
Planning Board Recommended approval 
 
 
 
Finance Committee did not recommend 4-3 
 
Summary: The State Legislature passed the MBTA Communities Zoning Act four years ago. The Act 
requires all MBTA communities and communities adjacent to MBTA communities to create overlay 
zoning districts that allow multi-family housing By Right (as opposed to by Special Permit). 
Sterling is considered an "MBTA- adjacent small town" and is required to find enough land to 
accommodate a housing district at a density of 15 units per acre, which equates to 156 multi-family 
units in the overlay district (approximately 12 to 15 acres of land). This density is not feasible without 
municipal sewer. The law requires that the Town allow for the possibility of creating 156 multi-family 
housing units, and does not require the Town to actually build this amount of housing. 
Sterling currently allows multi-family housing by Special Permit from the Zoning Board, then Site Plan 
Review from the Planning Board. This zoning change would simply do away with the Special Permit 
requirement. In a practical sense, all the Town is doing is adding another use allowed By Right within 
the 15-acres designated for the overlay district. 
Municipalities that fail to comply with this section shall not be eligible for a variety of State grants. 
The overlay district’s location was chosen for the following reasons: the close proximity of the 
Leominster sewer line, the nearby Northgate multi-family housing development, Route 12 being a 
MART (Montachusett Regional Transit Authority) bus route, and the district being located on both 
sides of the road so that any development that comes in will not channel traffic onto Route 12 from a 
single point of entry. 
Motion made to call the question. MAJORITY VOTE 
Motion to call the question passed by majority as declared by the Moderator 
Motion passed by majority as declared by the Moderator 
 
ARTICLE 2: DPW DESIGN FUNDS 
Motion made that the Town will appropriate $2,200,673 for the purpose of paying costs of 
designing a new DPW facility, including design development, final design and bidding, retaining 
a Designer and Owners Project Manager and the payment of all costs incidental or related 
thereto, and that to meet this appropriation, the Treasurer with the approval of the Select 
Board is authorized to borrow said sum under and pursuant to G.L. c. 44, §7(7), or any other 
enabling authority and to issue bonds or notes of the Town therefor; and to approve Article 2 
as set forth in the warrant provided, however, that no amounts shall be borrowed or expended 

===== PAGE 7 =====
November 13, 2025 Town Meeting Minutes 
 
Page 7 of 13 
 
pursuant to this vote unless the Town shall have approved a ballot question to exclude the 
amounts required to repay any such borrowing from the levy limit limitations of G.L. c. 59, §21C 
(also known as Proposition 2½). TWO-THIRDS VOTE 
Ryan Mouradian, DPW Superintendent, presented the Article 
Submitted by:  
DPW Facility Committee  
Recommendation: 
Select Board recommended approval 
Recommendation: 
Finance Committee recommended approval 5-2 
 
 
 
Capital Budget Committee recommended 3-2 
Summary: This article will fund the remaining portion of the design, permitting and bidding of the 
DPW Facility. If approved at both town meeting and the following election, the design phase is 
expected to move ahead in the winter and spring of 2026. The construction phase of the project is 
expected to be put out to bid in the summer of 2026, with a plan to return to a Town meeting with a 
bid in hand in the Fall of 2026 representing the actual cost to construct the facility being proposed. 
 
Motion made to call the question. MAJORITY VOTE 
Motion to call the question passed by majority as declared by the Moderator 
 
Motion did not carry, Article 2 defeated as declared by the Moderator 
Had the Article passed by two-thirds, the Clerk would have directed the Constable to post the 
Warrant for the Election to Debt Exclude.  No election was posted. 
 
ARTICLE 3:  DOG WASTE BYLAW 
Motion made that the Town vote to amend the Town General Bylaws by adding the following new 
section 18.6a to Chapter 18, the Sterling Animal Control Bylaw, that will require those persons in control 
of dogs to properly remove and dispose of dog waste, as shown below. MAJORITY VOTE 
 
18-6a Dog Waste Disposal 
 
A. Human exposure to dog feces is a health hazard as dog feces contain parasites, bacteria and 
viruses which cause significant diseases to humans and animals. As such, neglecting or refusing to 
immediately and properly dispose of dog waste is a behavior which is offensive to the public and is 
disruptive to the public peace.  
 
B. Any person who is in control of a dog anywhere within the Town of Sterling, other than on their 
own private property, must immediately remove and dispose of any feces left by the dog. For the 
purposes of this section “control” shall mean the dog’s owner or a person exercising restraint or 
