
===== PAGE 1 =====
ARTICLE XVIII 
 
MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District 
 
 
18.1 Purpose and Intent 
 
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multifamily 
housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General Laws 
Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as of right multi-family housing to accomplish the following 
purposes:  
 
 A. Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and typologies to provide 
equal access to new housing in the community for people with a variety of 
needs and income levels. 
B. Preserve open space by locating new housing within or adjacent to existing developed areas 
and infrastructure. 
 
 
18.2 Establishment and Applicability 
 
The MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 15.8 acres in size that is 
superimposed over the underlying zoning district (s) and is shown on the Zoning Map.  The MBTA 
Communities Multi-family Overlay District shall be comprised of the following lots and shall be referred to 
by the lot number and the Assessor’s map number:  Lot 45 Map 49, Lot 46 Map 49 and Lot 82, Map 49.   
 
A. Applicability of MCMOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within a 
MCMOD in accordance with the provisions of this Article XVIII. 
 
B. Underlying Zoning. The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on an underlying zoning 
district. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing 
the respective underlying zoning district shall remain in full force, except for uses allowed as of 
right in the MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in Article XVIII are governed by the requirements 
of the underlying zoning district. 
 
C. Floodplain District- the Requirements of Article VI of this By-law shall only apply to that portion 
of a lot in the MCMOD as is physically located in Zone A or AE on the Essex County Flood 
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the 
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program.   Article VI shall not apply to any portion 
of a lot in the MCMOD that is not located in said Zone A or AE. 
 
18.3 Definitions 
 
For purposes of this Article XVIII, the following definitions shall apply.  
  
A.  Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit and Site Plan 
Review.  
B. As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of application 
without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other discretionary 
zoning approval.  
C. Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for MBTA Communities Multi-Family Overlay 
Zoning District Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to 
time.  
D. Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities-EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive 
Office of Housing and Livable Communities, or any successor agency.  
E. Development standards. Provisions of Section 18.7 General Development Standards made 
applicable to projects within the MCMOD.  

===== PAGE 2 =====
F. Infill.  Parcel of vacant land such as an empty parcel between two properties. 
G. MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.  
H.   MBTA Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or 
more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building.  
I.  MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD). A zoning district, either a base 
district or an overlay district, in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right.  
J. Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. A solar 
panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a built structure 
for the purposes of this definition.  
K. Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or 
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.  
L. Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act.  
 
18.4 
Permitted Uses. 
 A. Principal Use Permitted As of Right in the MCMOD: MBTA Multi-family housing. 
 
B. Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to the permitted use 
in Section 18.4. A. 
1. Parking. Surface parking on the same lot as the principal use. 
 
18.5    Dimensional Standards. 
 
A.  Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning By-
law, the dimensional requirements applicable in the MCMOD are as follows: 
 
Standard  
Lot Size  
 
Minimum (SF)  
10,000 
Units/Lot                                       3-80 
Height 
 
Stories (Maximum)  
 3.0 
 
Feet (Maximum) 
 45 
Minimum Open Space 
 40% 
 
Standard  
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
 
Maximum Building Area 
25% 
lot area/dwelling unit 
3000 sf. 
 
Standard  
Minimum Frontage (ft)  
50 
Front Yard Setback  
   30 
 
Min. to Max. (ft.) 
 
Side Yard Setback  
 
Corner (ft)  
   20 
 
Interior (ft) 
   20 
Rear Yard Setback  
   20  
 
Min. to Max. (ft.) 
 
 
B. Multi-Building Lots. In the MCMOD, lots may have more than one principal building.  
 
C. Exceptions. The limitation on height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, 
ventilators, towers, silos, spires, or other ornamental features of buildings, which 

===== PAGE 3 =====
features are in no way used for living purposes and do not constitute more than 25% of 
the ground floor area of the building.  
 
D. Exceptions: Renewable Energy Installations.  To accommodate the installation of solar 
photovoltaic, solar thermal, living, and other eco-roofs, energy storage, and air-source heat pump 
equipment, such installations may be located within the any side yard or rear yard setback or on 
the roof of any Building notwithstanding the height limitations of Section 18.5 where the Site Plan 
Review Authority finds such installations shall not create a significant detriment to abutters in terms 
of noise or shadow and are appropriately integrated into the architecture of the building and the 
layout of the site. The installations shall not provide additional habitable space within the 
development. 
 
18.6 Off-Street Parking. 
These parking requirements are applicable to development in the MCMOD. 
A.  Number of parking spaces. The following maximum numbers of off-street parking 
spaces shall be permitted by use, either in surface parking or within garages or other 
structures: 
Use  
Maximum Spaces 
Multi-family  
Dwelling unit 2 or more bedrooms – 2 
Dwelling unit fewer than 2 bedrooms - 1  
 
B. Number of bicycle parking spaces. The following minimum numbers of covered 
bicycle storage spaces shall be provided by use: 
Use  
Minimum Spaces 
Multi-family 
1 space per Residential Dwelling Unit] 
 
C. Bicycle storage. For a multi-family development of 3 units or more 
covered bicycle parking spaces shall be integrated into the structure of the building(s). 
 
 
18.7. General Development Standards 
A. Development standards in the MCMOD are applicable to all multi-family development projects 
within the MCMOD. These standards are components of the Site Plan Review process in Section 
18.8 Site Plan Review and considered Standards of Review for a MCMOD site plan application. 
 
B. Site Design. 
1. Connections. Sidewalks shall provide a direct connection among building entrances, the public 
sidewalk (if applicable), bicycle storage, and parking. 
2. Vehicular access. Where feasible, curb cuts shall be minimized, and shared driveways 
encouraged. 
3. Screening for Parking. Surface parking adjacent to a public sidewalk shall be screened by a 
landscaped buffer of sufficient width to allow the healthy establishment of trees, shrubs, and 
perennials, but no less than [6 (six)] feet. The buffer may include a fence or wall of no more than 
three feet in height unless there is a significant grade change between the parking and the sidewalk. 
4. Parking Materials. The parking surface may be concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, bricks, 
or pavers, including pervious materials but not including grass or soil not contained within a paver 
or other structure. 
5. Plantings. Plantings shall include species that are native or adapted to the region. Plants on the 
Massachusetts Prohibited Plant List, as may be amended, shall be prohibited. 
6. Lighting. Light levels shall meet or exceed the minimum design guidelines defined by the 
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) and shall provide illumination necessary 
for safety and convenience while preventing glare and overspill onto adjoining properties and 
reducing the amount of skyglow. 
