
===== PAGE 1 =====
       
TOWN OF UPTON, MASSACHUSETTS 
   
LAND USE & INSPECTIONAL SERVICES 
 
 
LU&IS DIRECTOR 
 
 LU&IS ADMINISTRATOR 
Michael Antonellis • mantonellis@uptonma.gov 
 
Amy Bonina  •  abonina@uptonma.gov  
 
 
One Main Street • Suite 16 • Upton, MA 01568 
 
 
T: 508.529.2633 •  F: 508.529.4732 
 
 
 
 
Article ______. To see if the Town of Upton will approve an amendment to the Zoning Bylaw for 
adoption of a Section 300-8.2 MBTA Communities Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD) which will 
allow for a density of fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre in addition to other dimensional requirements; 
and to add a corresponding Section 300-2.1 Establishment, subsection J. “MBTA Communities 
Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD)” or take any other action relative thereto; 
And 
 
To see if the Town of Upton will approve an amendment to the Zoning Map by adding the MBTA 
Communities Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD) as shown or take any other action relative thereto; 
And 
 
To if the Town of Upton will approve an amendment to the Zoning Bylaw by adding a reference to the 
MBTA Communities Multifamily Overlay District “MCMOD” within Section 300-5.10.B to read as 
“Parking bylaw for UCBD and MCMOD only” or take any other action relative thereto. 
 
 
Section 300-8.2. MBTA Communities Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD) 
 
A. Purpose. The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is 
to allow multi-family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act 
(Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as of right multi-family 
housing to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1) Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and typologies to provide equal 
access to new housing throughout the community for people with a variety of needs 
and income levels; 
(2) Support vibrant neighborhoods by encouraging an appropriate mix and intensity of uses 
to support an active public space that provides equal access to housing, jobs, gathering 
spaces, recreational opportunities, goods, and services. 
(3) Locate housing within walking distance downtowns or town centers to promote general 
public health, reduce the number of vehicular miles travelled, support economic 
development, and meet community-based environmental goals, including reducing 
greenhouse gases and improving air quality. 
(4) Preserve open space in a community by locating new housing within or adjacent to 
existing developed areas and infrastructure. 
(5) Support public investment in public transit and pedestrian- and bike-friendly 
infrastructure. 
(6) Increase the municipal tax base through private investment in new residential 
developments.  
 
B. Establishment and Applicability. This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of 
approximately 14.3 acres in size that is superimposed over the underlying zoning district (s) 
and is shown on the Zoning Map. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
(1) Applicability of MCMOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within 
a MCMOD in accordance with the provisions of this Section 300-8.2. 
(2) Underlying Zoning. The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying 
zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the 
Zoning Bylaw governing the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full 
force, except for uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the MCMOD. Uses that 
are not identified in Section 300-8.2 are governed by the requirements of the underlying 
zoning district(s). 
 
C. Definitions. 
(1) 
Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded in 
its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or 
household of a specified income, or both.  
(2) 
Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this Section 
300-8.2.C.  
(3) 
Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site Plan 
Review, or Special Permit.  
(4) 
Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan statistical 
region that includes the Town of Upton, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD).  
(5) 
As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of 
application without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, 
or other discretionary zoning approval.  
(6) 
Building coverage. The maximum area of the lot that can be attributed to the footprint of 
the buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building Coverage does not include 
surface parking.  
(7) 
Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts Under 
Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time.  
(8) 
DHCD. The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development, or any 
successor agency.  
(9) 
Development standards. Provisions of Section 300-8.2.G. General Development 
Standards made applicable to projects within the MCMOD.  
(10) 
Lot. An area of land with definite boundaries that is used or available for use as the site 
of a building or buildings.  
(11) 
MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.  
(12) 
Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and non-
residential uses, including, commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses.  
(13) 
Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or 
more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each 
building.  
(14) 
Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay district, 
in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right.  
(15) 
Open space. Contiguous undeveloped land within a parcel boundary. 
(16) 
Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple 
stories; a vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; or 
a vehicle parking area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and has 

===== PAGE 3 =====
a parking surface at least eight feet below grade. Structured Parking does not include 
surface parking or carports, including solar carports. 
(17) 
Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the space. A 
solar panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not count as a 
built structure for the purposes of this definition. 
(18) 
Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities 
for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, 
cooking. and sanitation. 
(19) 
Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
(20) 
Site plan review authority. The Site Plan Review authority is the Planning Board. 
(21) 
Special permit granting authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall include the  
Select Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board, or Zoning Administrators as 
designated by the Zoning bylaw for the issuance of special permits. 
(22) 
Sub-district. An area within the MCMOD that is geographically smaller than the MCMOD 
district and differentiated from the rest of the district by use, dimensional standards, or 
development standards 
(23) 
Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units 
maintained by DHCD used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate-income 
housing for the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law. 
(24) 
Transit station. An MBTA subway station, commuter rail station, or ferry terminal.  
a. Commuter rail station. Any MBTA commuter rail station with year-round, rather than 
intermittent, seasonal, or event-based, service.  
b. Ferry terminal. The location where passengers embark and disembark from regular, 
year-round MBTA ferry service.  
c. Subway station. Any of the stops along the MBTA Red Line, Green Line, Orange Line, 
or Blue Line. 
 
D. Permitted Uses. 
(1) Uses Permitted as of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the 
MCMOD. 
a. Multifamily housing. 
b. Mixed Use Development. As of right uses in mixed-use development are as 
follows: 
Ground Floor 
Community space. 
Educational uses. 
Retail. 
Experiential retail, including retail associated with dance or exercise studios, 
music studios, photography studios, or other combination of education, 
services, and retail. 
Restaurant, café, and other eating establishments without a drive-through. 
Office, professional office, medical and dental offices, and co-working space. 
Artists’ studios, maker space, and small-scale food production no more than 
5,000 SF, and retail associated with each use.  
Any Floor  

===== PAGE 4 =====
Residential (required component).  
Uses that are allowed by-right within the Upton Center Business District 
(UCBD) pursuant to section 300-3.1 
 
(2) Uses Permitted by a Special Permit. The following uses and accessory uses are allowed 
by Special Permit: 
a. Uses that are allowed by Special Permit within the Upton Center Business 
District (UCBD) pursuant to section 300-3.1. 
b. Where a use may be allowed within the UCBD district by Special Permit, but is 
not otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district, the standards of the 
UCBD district shall be applied; 
 
(3) Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to any of the 
permitted uses in Section D.1. 
a. Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an 
above ground or underground parking garage or other building on the same lot 
as the principal use; 
b. Uses that are allowed as of right within the underlying zoning district; 
c. Uses that are allowed by-right within the Upton Center Business District (UCBD) 
pursuant to section 300-3.1. 
d. Where a use may be allowed within the UCBD district by-right or by Special 
permit, but is not otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district, the 
provisions of the UCBD district shall be applied. 
e. Uses that may be permitted under Section 300-3.2 Accessory Uses and 
Structures. 
 
E. Dimensional Standards. 
(1) Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this 
Zoning, the dimensional requirements applicable in the MCMOD are as follows: 
Standard 
 
Lot Size 
 
   Minimum (SF) 
10,000 
Height  
 
   Stories 
2.5 
   Feet 
25 
Minimum Open Space 
0% 
 
(2) Additional Standards 
Standard 
 
Maximum Building Coverage 
30% 
 
(3) Additional Standards 
Standard 
 
Minimum Frontage 
100 
Front Yard Setback 
30 
