
===== PAGE 1 =====
       
TOWN OF UPTON, MASSACHUSETTS 
   
Planning Board 
 
 
LU&IS DIRECTOR 
 
 LU&IS ADMINISTRATOR 
Michael Antonellis • mantonellis@uptonma.gov 
 
Amy Bonina  •  abonina@uptonma.gov  
 
 
One Main Street • Suite 16 • Upton, MA 01568 
 
 
T: 508.529.2633 •  F: 508.529.4732 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 19: 
ZONING BYLAW – MBTA COMMUNITIES 
 
To see if the Town  will vote to amend  the Zoning Map of Upton, Massachusetts  to add the 
proposed “MCMOD (MBTA) District”, being an overlay district, shown on the Article ___ 
Exhibit- MBTA Zoning Map entitled “MBTA Communities Multifamily Overlay District 
(MCMOD)” included in the Warrant and to amend the Town of Upton Zoning By-laws  Section 
300-2.1 Establishment, Section 300-2.2 Map and Section 300-5.10.B (parking) and to add a new 
Section 300-8.2 MBTA Communities Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD) as follows and to 
authorize the Town Clerk to make any necessary non-substantive corrections including 
renumbering to incorporate these changes into the Zoning By-laws and Zoning Map,  or take any 
other action relative thereto; 
 
 
Section 300-2.1 Establishment. 
 
Add the following:  
 
J.  
MBTA Communities Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD) 
 
Section 300-2.2 Map. 
 
Amend the current Zoning Map of Upton, Massachusetts to add the proposed “MBTA 
Communities Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD)”, being an overlay district, shown on 
the Article 19 Exhibit- MBTA Zoning Map entitled “MBTA Zoning Compliance” a copy of 
which is filed with the Town Clerk, or take any other action relative thereto. 
 
 
Section 500-10-B.  Parking bylaw for UCBD only. 
 
Amend this to read “Section 500-10-B.  Parking bylaw for UCBD and MCMOD only.” 
 
Add a new section 300-8.2 as follows:  
 
Section 300-8.2. MBTA Communities Multifamily Overlay District (MCMOD) 
 
A. Purpose. The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District 
(MCMOD) is to allow multi-family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of 
the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning provides for as 
of right multi-family housing to accomplish the following purposes: 

===== PAGE 2 =====
(1) Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and typologies to provide 
equal access to new housing throughout the community for people with a variety of 
needs and income levels; 
(2) Support vibrant neighborhoods by encouraging an appropriate mix and intensity of 
uses to support an active public space that provides equal access to housing, jobs, 
gathering spaces, recreational opportunities, goods, and services. 
(3) Locate housing within walking distance downtowns or town centers to promote 
general public health, reduce the number of vehicular miles travelled, support 
economic development, and meet community-based environmental goals, including 
reducing greenhouse gases and improving air quality. 
(4) Preserve open space in a community by locating new housing within or adjacent to 
existing developed areas and infrastructure. 
(5) Support public investment in public transit and pedestrian- and bike-friendly 
infrastructure. 
(6) Increase the municipal tax base through private investment in new residential 
developments.  
 
B. Establishment and Applicability. This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area 
of approximately 14.3 acres in size that is superimposed over the underlying zoning 
district (s) and is shown on the Zoning Map. 
(1) Applicability of MCMOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing or mixed 
use housing located within a MCMOD in accordance with the provisions of this 
Section 300-8.2. 
(2) Underlying Zoning. The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying 
zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the 
Zoning Bylaw governing the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in 
full force, except for uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the MCMOD. 
Uses that are not identified in Section 300-8.2 are governed by the requirements of 
the underlying zoning district(s). 
 
C. Definitions. 
(1) 
Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction 
recorded in its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an 
individual or household of a specified income, or both.  
(2) 
Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this Section 
300-8.2.C.  
(3) 
Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site 
Plan Review, or Special Permit.  
(4) 
Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan 
statistical region that includes the Town of Upton, as defined by the U.S. Department 
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).  
(5) 
As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of 
application without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, 
or other discretionary zoning approval.  

===== PAGE 3 =====
(6) 
Building coverage. The maximum area of the lot that can be attributed to the footprint 
of the buildings (principal and accessory) on that lot. Building Coverage does not 
include surface parking.  
(7) 
Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time.  
(8) 
EOHLC.  The Executive Office of Housing and Community Development. 
(9) 
Development standards. Provisions of Section 300-8.2.G. General Development 
Standards made applicable to projects within the MCMOD.  
(10) Lot. A continuous parcel of land with legally definable boundaries.  
(11) MBTA. The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.  
(12) Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and non-
residential uses, including, commercial, institutional, or other uses.  
(13) Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two 
or more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each 
building.  
(14) Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay 
district, in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right.  
(15) Open space. Contiguous undeveloped land within a parcel boundary. 
(16) Parking, structured. A structure in which vehicle parking is accommodated on multiple 
stories; a vehicle parking area that is underneath all or part of any story of a structure; 
or a vehicle parking area that is not underneath a structure, but is entirely covered, and 
has a parking surface at least eight feet below grade. Structured Parking does not 
include surface parking or carports, including solar carports. 
(17) Parking, surface. One or more parking spaces without a built structure above the 
space. A solar panel designed to be installed above a surface parking space does not 
count as a built structure for the purposes of this definition. 
(18) Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living 
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, 
eating, cooking. and sanitation. 
(19) Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act, General Laws Chapter 40A. 
(20) Site plan review authority. The Site Plan Review authority is the Planning Board. 
(21) Special permit granting authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall include 
the Select Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board, or Zoning Administrators 
as designated by the Zoning Bylaws for the issuance of special permits. 
(22) Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units 
maintained by DHCD used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate-
income housing for the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit 
Law. 
(23) Transit station. An MBTA subway station, commuter rail station, or ferry terminal.  
a. Commuter rail station. Any MBTA commuter rail station with year-round, rather 
than intermittent, seasonal, or event-based, service.  
b. Ferry terminal. The location where passengers embark and disembark from regular, 
year-round MBTA ferry service.  
c. Subway station. Any of the stops along the MBTA Red Line, Green Line, Orange 
Line, or Blue Line. 
 

===== PAGE 4 =====
D. Permitted Uses. 
(1) Uses Permitted as of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the 
MCMOD. 
a. Multifamily housing. 
b. Mixed Use Development. As of right uses in mixed-use development are as 
follows, any other type of mixed-use is prohibited: 
Ground Floor 
Community space. 
Educational uses. 
Retail. 
Experiential retail, including retail associated with dance or exercise 
studios, music studios, photography studios, or other combination of 
education, services, and retail. 
Restaurant, café, and other eating establishments without a drive-through. 
Office, professional office, medical and dental offices, and co-working 
space. 
Artists’ studios, maker space, and small-scale food production no more than 
5,000 SF, and retail associated with each use.  
Any Floor  
Residential (required component).  
Uses that are allowed by-right within the Upton Center Business District 
(UCBD) pursuant to section 300-3.1 
 
 
(2) Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to any of the 
permitted uses in Section D.1. 
a. Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an 
above ground or underground parking garage or other building on the same lot 
as the principal use; 
b. Uses that may be permitted under Section 300-3.2 Accessory Uses and 
Structures. 
 
(3) Uses Permitted by a Special Permit. The following uses and accessory uses are 
allowed by Special Permit and subject to the requirements of the MCMOD district: 
a. Uses that are allowed by Special Permit within the Upton Center Business 
District (UCBD) pursuant to section 300-3.1. 
b. Where a use may be allowed within the UCBD district by Special Permit, but 
is not otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district, the standards of the 
UCBD district shall be applied; 
 
E. Dimensional Standards. 
(1) Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this 
Zoning, the dimensional requirements applicable to multi-family and mixed use 
development in the MCMOD are as follows: 
Standard 
 
Lot Size 
 
