
===== PAGE 23 =====
Historic District Commission shall give the fullest consideration to the special medical and 
financial needs of medical institutions within said district. 
3. In case any section, paragraph or part of this By-Law for any reason is declared invalid or 
unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph or part shall 
continue in full force and effect.  (Article 71 of April 28, 1986 Town Meeting; Approved  by 
Attorney General October 8, 1986, and on the accompanying plan to the extent it is in 
conformity to the aforesaid vote).”  
PAGE 8
DIVISION I, ARTICLE V     LAND SALE & SALE OF PERSONAL 
PROPERTY, BIDS SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY, BIDS 
Section 1. The Selectmen may sell, after first giving notice of the time and place of sale by 
posting such notice of sale in some convenient and public place in the town fourteen (14) days,
at least, before the sale, of property taken by the town under the tax title procedure, provided 
that the Selectmen may reject any bid which they deem inadequate. “ 
PAGE 13
DIVISION II, ARTICLE I    STREET RULES
“Section 6. No unauthorized person shall intentionally extinguish or light, or tamper  with, any
street lamp, or injure the posts, glass, or other fixtures of the same, or injure any pump, 
fountain, or water pipes, standing on any street, under a penalty of not more than twenty 
($20.00) dollars for each offense. 
Section 7. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm, gun or pistol in or across any street or
within 500 feet of any dwelling in use without the occupant's permission.  This section does 
not apply to the use of such weapons at any military exercise or review, under the authority of 
a commissioned officer of the militia nor in the lawful defense of the person, property, or 
family of any citizen, nor in performance of any duty required by law, nor to any person firing 
a salute by the permission of the Selectmen.
Section 10.  No person or persons shall, by grouping or otherwise, obstruct or impede               
a free passage on the sidewalks for foot passengers. 
Section 11.   No person shall robe or disrobe in a vehicle of any description on any street of 
the Town, and no person shall obstruct the view of the interior of any vehicle, except a trailer, 
by curtains, paper, paint or cloth of any kind, while on any street or property of the Town.
Section 13. No person shall enter upon the premises of another or upon any public property 
with intention of peeping into the windows of a house or other building, or of spying in -14- 
any manner upon any person or persons therein. 
Section 14.  Whoever having arrived at the age of discretion profanely curses or  swears, and  
whoever in a street or other public place accosts or addresses another person with  profane or 
obscene language may be arrested without a warrant, and shall be punished be a fine of not 
more than twenty ($20.00) dollars.
Section 17.   No person shall behave himself in a disorderly manner or use any indecent 
language in any public place.       

===== PAGE 24 =====
Section 19. (a)   Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private way or  of 
improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for business areas for  
businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities, cultural  
centers or for any other place where the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees, 
shall reserve park-spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle owned and operated 
by  a disabled veteran or handicapped person whose vehicle bears the distinguishing license 
plate authorized by Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90, Section 2, according to the 
following formula: If the number of parking spaces in any such area is more than fifteen but 
not more than twenty-five, one parking space; more than twenty-five but not more than forty, 
five percent of such spaces but not less than two; more than forty but not more than one 
hundred, four percent of such spaces but not less than three; more than one hundred but not 
more than two hundred, three percent of such spaces but not less than four; more than two 
hundred but not more than  five hundred, two percent of such spaces but not less than six; 
more than five hundred but not  more than one thousand, one and one half percent of such 
spaces but not less than ten; more  than one thousand but not more than two thousand, one 
percent of such spaces but not less than twenty; and more than five thousand, one half of one 
percent of such spaces, but not less than thirty. 
Section 19. (b)   Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provisions of  paragraph (a)  
shall be identified by the use of above grade signs with white lettering against a blue 
background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking:  Special Plate Required.  
Unauthorized Vehicles May be Removed at Owner's Expense":  shall be near as possible to a  
building entrance or walkway; shall be adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods  
permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person; and shall be twelve feet wide or two eight
foot wide areas with four feet of cross hatch between them.
Section 20.  No vehicle shall be left parked or standing in any areas designated for use by 
disabled veterans or handicapped persons as authorized by Section 19A, or in such manner as 
to obstruct a curb ramp designed for use by handicapped persons as means of egress to a street 
or public way. The penalty for violation of this By-Law shall be as follows:  For the first 
offense, fifteen dollars; for the second offense, twenty-five dollars; for each subsequent 
offense, the vehicle may be removed according to the provisions of the Massachusetts General
Laws, Chapter 266, Section 120D.”
PAGE 24
DIVISION III, ARTICLE III    STREET NAMES
“The naming of all ways open for public use shall be in accordance with Section 3A of 
Chapter 85 of the General Laws.”
PAGE 28
DIVISION IV, ARTICLE I     RULES AND REGULATIONS
“Section 10.  In order to preserve and protect public health and safety, no person or persons 
shall operate a marina or a boat yard without first obtaining a license issued by the Board of 
Selectmen.  The application procedure and fee for such a license shall be established by the 
Board of Selectmen.  No license shall be issued unless such marina or boat yard provides the 
following: (1) (2) (3) Adequate facilities for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage 
or other sanitary waste, as said Board of Selectmen may specify, including facilities for the 
purging out and  cleaning of holding tanks, the contents of which shall be then disposed of in 

===== PAGE 25 =====
such manner as not to be discharged into or near  any waters of the Commonwealth, unless 
such discharge is to the municipal sewerage system or to an adequate sewage treatment or 
disposal facility approved by the Board of Selectmen; Adequate and conveniently located 
dockside toilet facilities for the use of the occupants of watercraft; and Adequate and 
conveniently located trash receptacles or similar devices for the disposal of litter and refuse. 
Any license issued under this section shall be for a term of one year and may be renewed 
annually, with the understanding that its application to the licensing of marinas shall not be 
inconsistent with similar duties imposed on the Division of Water Pollution Control by G.L. C 
91 Bloom v. Worcester, 363 Mass. 136 {1973}). (Article 5 of October 19, 1987 Town 
Meeting; Approved by Attorney General December 28, 1987)”
CHART 3
OBSELETE
PAGE 2 
DIVISION I, ARTICLE II     
BOARD MEETINGS AND 
HEARINGS 
Section 1. and Section 5. - Link  
“http://www.wareham.ma.us/subscriber.shtml”
PAGE 3 
DIVISION I, ARTICLE III     PORTION OF 1ST SENTENCE
 
TOWN COUNSEL, BOARDS & COMMITTEES’ RECORDS, 
ASSESSORS’ 
LISTS
Section 1. The phrase, “preferably a resident of the Town”
PAGE 8
DIVISION I, ARTICLE IV     INSURANCE POLICIES, TOWN 
ACCOUNTANT, TOWN FEES, PROCUREMENT, FINANCE COMMITTEE, 
CEMETERIES, COUNCIL ON AGING, HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION, 
COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES 
“Section 12A.  The Wareham Visiting Nurse Agency is abolished as an agency of the Town in
accordance with the provisions of Article 6.2 of the Charter of the Town.               
Section 12B.  The Board of Selectmen are authorized to enter into contracts for  community 
health services upon such terms and conditions as they deem appropriate, which may include 
contracts in excess of three (3) years. 
Section 12C.  This By-Law shall take effect upon approval by the Attorney General in 
accordance with G.L. Chapter 40, Section 32 or upon the effective date of an agreement 
entered into by the Town for the provision of community health services, whichever occurs 
later.  In the event that an agreement for the provision of community health services is not 
entered into by all necessary parties by March 31, 1996, this By-Law shall not take effect.  
(Article 1 of July 31, 1995 Town Meeting; Approved by Attorney General August 10, 1995).”
PAGE 13
DIVISION II, ARTICLE I     
STREET RULES
“Section 1A. No bale, box, barrel, bundle, bottle, cask, crate, package of merchandise or any 
other commodity; no boards, timber, cordwood, brick or stone, or article of furniture; no sign 
