
===== PAGE 1 =====
Article 26. Amend Zoning Bylaws and Town Zoning Map - MBTA Communities 
Multi-Family Housing 
Proposed by: Planning Board, Select Board  
To see if the Town will vote to amend Chapter 198 of the Code of the Town of Wayland to: 
1) Add a new Article 27 Multi-Family Housing Overlay Zoning District, in substantially 
the following form; 
 
2) Add 198-302.1.11.  A Multi-Family Housing Overlay District that includes land in four 
sub-districts as follows: 
 
302.1.11.1.  “Route 20 West” that includes the land shown as Lots 1, 2, and 3 on Plan 1807 of 
1985, insofar as they are within the limits of the Town of Wayland, on file at the Middlesex South 
Registry of Deeds;  
 
302.1.11.2.“River’s Edge West” that includes the land shown as Lot A and a portion of Lot E on 
a plan entitled Multi-Family Housing Overlay District – River’s Edge West Sub-District 
Wayland, Massachusetts, dated March, 2024, a copy of which is on file at the Office of the Town 
Clerk and at the Department of Public Works Engineering Division; 
 
302.1.11.3.  “Town Center Development Area” that includes the land shown as Lot 7-1, a portion 
of Lot 1-1-C and a portion of Lot 2-1 on a plan entitled Multi-Family Housing Overlay District –
Town Center Development Area Sub-District Wayland, Massachusetts, dated March, 2024, a 
copy of which is on file at the Office of the Town Clerk and the Department of Public Works 
Engineering Division; 
 
302.1.11.4.  “Planned Development District – Central” that includes the land shown as Lot 17 on 
the Middlesex South Land Registration Office Plan 16568L, Sheet 5, dated August 2, 1979. 
 
3) Add to 198 Attachment 1 Table of Dimensional Requirements the words “Multi-Family 
Housing Overlay District – Requirements of Article 27 apply”; and 
 
4)  Amend the Town Zoning Overlay Districts Map to add the Multi-Family Housing 
Overlay District.  
Article 27.  Multi-Family Housing Overlay District 
198-2701.  Purposes 
2701.1.  The purpose of the Multi-Family Housing Overlay District (MFHD) is to: 
 
2701.1.1  Provide for multi-family housing development in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40A,  
§ 3A and the Section 3A Compliance Guidelines of the Executive Office of Housing and 
Livable Communities (EOHLC), as may be amended from time to time; 
2701.1.2.  Implement the Wayland Housing Production Plan; 
2701.1.3.  Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and types to provide access to new 
and redeveloped housing for people with a variety of needs and income levels; 
 
2701.1.4.  Locate housing in areas to promote public health and meet the community’s 

===== PAGE 2 =====
environmental goals, including maintaining open space, reducing greenhouse gases and improving air 
quality; 
 
2701.1.5.  Locate housing in or near existing developed areas and roadways;  
 
2701.1.6.  Provide multi-family housing that is well integrated into Wayland’s land use patterns; and 
 
2701.1.7.  Increase the tax base through private investment in new housing development. 
 
198-2702.  Definitions 
 
2702.1.  As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
 
Affordable dwelling unit – A residential unit that is restricted in perpetuity for sale, lease or 
rental to a qualified income-eligible household at specific price limits that qualify such residential 
unit for inclusion in the Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory maintained by the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities.   
Building – A structure with a roof supported by walls and intended to shelter people or goods. 
Building height – The distance, measured vertically from the average grade to the highest roof 
element.  However, limitations in height shall not apply to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, tanks, 
bulkheads, penthouses or similar enclosures for mechanical equipment and stairways, nor to solar 
panels and other necessary features usually carried above roofs so long as such features are not 
used for living purposes and, to the extent practical, are screened from view.  Wireless 
communications facilities may not be erected except in compliance with Article 15 or Article 
15A. 
Development and Use Plan – A comprehensive plan depicting an entire development scheme on 
a lot and/or lots to ensure that site layout, building design, and outdoor amenity spaces meet the 
Design Standards for Site Layout and Development as established by the Planning Board. 
Dwelling unit – A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more 
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation; but 
no trailer, trailer coach or mobile home, whether or not self-propelled, and whether or not the 
wheels thereof may have been removed, shall be construed to be a dwelling. 
Grade – A reference plane representing the average of finished ground adjoining the building at 
all exterior walls, established by the lowest points within the area between the building and a 
point six feet from the building. 
Lot – An area of land with definite boundaries that is used or available for use as the site of a 
building or buildings. 
Lot coverage – The percentage of a lot that may be covered by the footprint of buildings and the 
footprint and roofs of other structures. 
MFHD -- Multi-Family Housing Overlay District 
Mixed-use – A combination of residential and commercial uses including retail, office, 
municipal, or service establishments. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
2707.4.  Inclusion of Affordable Dwelling Units 
2707.4.1.  In lieu of the requirements of Article 22 of the Town’s Zoning Bylaw (the “Inclusion of 
Affordable Housing”), the provisions of this Article 27 shall apply. 
2707.4.2.  A minimum of 10% of the dwelling units on any lot in the MFHD shall be affordable units, 
subject to a cap on household income eligibility of not less than 80% of area median income. 
2707.4.3.  If, when applying the percentage to the total number of units to determine the 
number of required affordable units, the number of affordable dwelling units results in a 
fraction, the number shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. 
2707.4.4.  No project may be divided or phased to nullify or reduce the number of required 
affordable dwelling units. 
2707.4.5.  Affordable dwelling units shall be similar in size and indistinguishable from 
market-rate units with regard to quality of interior and exterior materials and finishes, shall 
be distributed proportionately among unit sizes and throughout the development, and shall 
have use of all common areas including parking areas and amenities. 
 
2707.4.6.  Affordable dwelling units shall be rented or sold subject to deed restrictions, restrictive 
covenants, contractual agreements, and/or other mechanisms restricting the use and occupancy, rent 
levels, and sales prices of such units to assure their affordability over time. Restrictive instruments 
shall be subject to review and approval by Town Counsel and shall be recorded with the Middlesex 
South Registry of Deeds prior to the commencement of any construction. Any condominium 
documents and fees shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Board prior to issuance of 
a building permit. 
 
2707.4.7.  At the request of the Town, a monitoring agreement for oversight of affordability 
restrictions shall be entered into and shall be recorded with the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds 
prior to the issuance of the first building permit for any dwelling unit in the project. 
 
2707.4.8.  To the maximum extent permitted by law and, if applicable, any federal or state financing 
or subsidy program supporting the development, first preference for the initial offering of an 
affordable dwelling unit shall be given to households that meet one or more of the following criteria: 
 
2707.4.8.1.  At least one member of the household is a Resident of the Town of Wayland at the 
time of an affordable unit lottery application deadline; 
 
2707.4.8.2.  At least one member of the household is either a daughter, son, parent or sibling of a 
Wayland Resident; 
 
2707.4.8.3.  At least one member of the household is a municipal employee of the Town of 
Wayland. 
 
198-2708.  Decision and Appeals 
 
2708.1.  The Planning Board shall issue a Decision on the Development and Use Plan in accordance with 
the regulations adopted to implement the provisions of this Article 27 and shall file the decision with the 
Town Clerk. 
 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
2708.2.  Any person aggrieved by the Planning Board’s decision may appeal per M.G.L. c. 40A, § 17 
within 20 days after the MFHD Development Plan Approval decision has been filed with the Town Clerk. 
 
FINANCE COMMITTEE COMMENTS:  On January 14, 2021, Massachusetts adopted amendments 
to the Zoning Law, M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3A, requiring that 177 so called “MBTA communities” 
have zoning in place that allows multi-family housing as of right.  Although Wayland does not have 
public transportation, it has been classified as an “MBTA Adjacent Community” because of train stations 
located in the adjoining towns of Weston, Lincoln, Natick and the City of Framingham.  Thus, Wayland 
is subject to the new law and Guidelines adopted by the Executive Office of Housing and Livable 
Communities (EOHLC). 
The stated purpose of the Massachusetts Zoning Law amendment is to enhance the availability of housing 
and housing choices in Massachusetts.  The EOHLC Guidelines make it clear that the recent amendment 
is not a mandate to construct a specified number of housing units.  The Town needs to show that our 
zoning allows multi-family housing as of right and that a sufficient number of units could be added to or 
replace existing uses and structures over time.  The Guidelines recognize that such additions or 
replacements may be unlikely to occur soon. 
The basic requirements imposed by the Commonwealth are that a multi-family housing district: i) contain 
50 acres – made up of at least one area of 25 contiguous acres and several smaller areas of no less than 5 
contiguous acres each; ii) support a minimum density of 15 units per acre on average across the entire 
district; iii) not be subject to any age restrictions; iv) for density calculations, cannot include surface 
waterbodies, wetlands and buffer zones, protected open space and recreational land, cemeteries, Zone I 
wellhead protection areas, privately-owned land used for educational or institutional uses, publicly-owned 
land generally; v) avoid sensitive land such as land subject to flooding and priority habitat for rare or 
threatened species; and vi) encourage development of a scale, density and aesthetic that are compatible 
with existing surrounding uses. 
This is not an inclusionary housing initiative and, in fact per the Guidelines, this bylaw can only require 
that 10% of the units in any new multi-family development meet income-based affordability standards.  
Also, the bylaw may not require that the multi-family use be accompanied by a commercial use (i.e., 
mixed-use) and it may not restrict the size of units and bedrooms, number of bedrooms or number of 
occupants. 
THE PROPOSAL: In accordance with the EOHLC Guidelines, the proposed Multi-Family Housing 
Overlay District Bylaw and the Town Zoning Overlay Districts Map would be amended to allow multi-
family housing in four sub-districts totaling just over 50 acres – Route 20 West (7.7 acres), River’s Edge 
West (5.7 acres), Town Center Development Area (10.7 acres plus right-of-way area), and Planned 
Development District – Central (25.1 acres).  See Map at Appendix C. 
As structured, the bylaw would not replace existing zoning districts or existing zoning overlay districts, 
but would be superimposed over them.  Use of this new mixed-use housing overlay would be at the 
option of the property owner.  The property owner could pursue development and use of his/her land that 
is located within the Multi-Family Housing Overlay District either by complying with the requirements of 
this new overlay district or by complying with the standards of the existing underlying district or another 
applicable existing overlay district.   
The proposed bylaw provides dimensional requirements and aggregate limits for each sub-district 
including minimum lot size, minimum frontage, minimum setbacks, maximum building height, maximum 
lot coverage and maximum number of units per acre.  Some of the parameters vary by sub-district.  It also 
has provisions requiring the inclusion of the maximum allowed 10% affordable dwelling units. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
The proposed by-law requires that all new developments first apply to the Planning Board for Site Plan 
Review and submit a Development and Use Plan that shows site layout, building design, outdoor lighting, 
signage, site amenities, landscaping, screening, buffers, stormwater management, and open space.  The 
Planning Board will be adopting regulations to implement the provisions of the bylaw. 
Failure to adopt the proposed bylaw and map may result in loss of funding from the many 
Commonwealth grant programs that have provided funds to Wayland including the $49,320 in grants that 
is paying for consultant’s work on this bylaw effort. In addition, the Town will be faced with potential 
civil suits by the Massachusetts Attorney General and others.  The loss of these grant monies and 
potential lawsuits could impact the town’s financial position substantially. Wayland received 
approximately $4,182,200 in grants last year.  The loss of future grants would have to be absorbed 
through a tax rate increase or a cut in services. 
The Town is required to submit a District Compliance Application along with the Town Meeting-
approved zoning bylaw and zoning map by December 31, 2024. 
See Planning Board Report To Town Meeting at Appendix D and Zoning Overlay Districts Map at 
Appendix C. 
Select Board recommends approval. Vote: 5-0-0 
Planning Board recommends approval. Vote: 4-0-1 
 
ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR: It is the law and Wayland should comply.  
The chosen sub-districts encourage development of a scale, density and aesthetic that are compatible with 
existing surrounding uses.  
Locating the sub-districts with easy access to Routes 20 and 30 makes sense because any future public 
transportation would likely run along those corridors.  
The proposed bylaw allows landowners in each of the sub-districts to have the option and decide whether 
to take advantage of the new overlay district.  
Landowners in the Route 20 West and Town Center Development Area sub-districts have requested that 
their properties be included in the new overly district.  
Adoption of this bylaw will avoid lawsuits from the state and others for non-compliance and will allow 
Wayland to continue to be eligible for necessary state grant funding.  
Can increase the tax base through private investment in new residential development. 
ARGUMENTS OPPOSED: Zoning should be left to towns and not dictated by the state.  
Three of the proposed sub-districts are located along Route 20 and will add more traffic to an already 
busy corridor.  
The sub-districts should be more dispersed across the town and there should be more than just four large 
areas.  
It would be preferable to have more commercial uses along Route 20 rather than residential uses.  
Some of the selected areas might not be on conservation land but abut protected areas and could impact 
them.  
Some residents feel the zoning could negatively impact their property values.  
Some of these areas have difficult barriers to get approval and probably will never get built. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
Additional housing will add a strain to town services and increase costs. 
 
RECOMMENDATION: The Finance Committee recommends approval. Vote: 6-1-0 
 
QUANTUM OF VOTE:  Majority. See Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, section 5. 
 
CONSISTENCY WITH LAW:  This proposed bylaw is not repugnant to Massachusetts or federal law.  
See Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 3A. 
 
For more information, contact Anette Lewis, Chair of the Planning Board, at alewis@wayland.ma.us. 
 
