
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported January 31, 2023  1:34 PM
Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Guidelines before attempting to complete this
form.Please note: &nbsp;Action Plan Forms must be submitted by a
municipal official with authority to act on behalf of the municipality on
matters of zoning, such as the municipal CEO or planning director.
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A Guidelines establish zoning metrics that apply uniquely to
each MBTA community based on its local transit stations, existing housing
stock, population, &nbsp;and developable land. &nbsp;This section of the
Action Plan helps to identify the transit stations that determined each
community's category. &nbsp;Appendix 1 of the Section 3A Guidelines lists
each community's category and minimum multi-family unit capacity
requirement.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Wellesley
1.2. Community Category
Commuter rail community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
1392
1.4. Does this municipality have any
MBTA rapid transit stations within its
boundaries?
No
1.5. Does this municipality have any
MBTA commuter rail stations within its
boundaries?
Yes
1.5a. Please list MBTA commuter rail
stations that are located within the
municipal boundaries
Wellesley Square, Wellesley Hills, Wellesley Farms
1.6. Does this municipality have any
other MBTA transit stations that are
located outside of its municipal
boundaries that may have "developable
station area" within them?
Yes
Description Area
Stations that are located outside of municipal boundaries but that have
"developable station area" within the boundaries might affect district
location criteria, as further described in Section 8 of the Guidelines. Please
refer to Section 1 of the Guidelines for definitions of "transit station area",
"developable station area", and "developable land".

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.6a. Please list the MBTA transit
stations that are located outside of the
municipal boundaries but might have
developable station area within them.
Waban T Station
1.7. Please provide the name of the
person filling out this form
Meghan Jop
1.7a. Title
Executive Director of General Government Services
1.7b. Email Address
mjop@wellesleyma.gov
1.7c. Phone Number
(781) 431-1019 ext. 2200
1.8 Please provide the name of the
municipal CEO
Wellesley Select Board Chair Lise Olney
1.8b Mailing address of municipal CEO
525 Washington Street
Town Hall
Wellesley, MA 02482
1.8c Email address of municipal CEO
sel@wellesleyma.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team developing
the multi-family zoning district.
Eric Arbeene, Interim Planning Director
Emma Coates, Planner
Michael Grant, Inspector of Buildings
Marybeth Martello, Sustainability Director
Amy Frigulietti, Assistant Executive Director, Economic Dev.
Meghan Jop, AICP, Executive Director of General Gov't Services
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. Does this municipality have any
established housing related goals or
strategies from municipal planning
documents, such as a Housing
Production Plan, Master Plan, or
Economic Development Plan?
Yes

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or objectives,
and the work that has been done to
date.
The Town approved a Housing Production Plan (HPP) in September of
2018,and achieved Housing Choice Designation by the Commonwealth in
March 2021. Since adoption of the HPP, the Town has reached over 11%
in the Subsidized Housing Inventory. Since adoption the Town has
achieved several critical goals including adoption of zoning provisions for a
40R District that allows for 600 housing units in 2019 of which 350 units
were recently completed. There is currently a proposal to increase the
density in the 40R to 850 units which will be reviewed in April 2023 at the
Annual Town Meeting. The Town in 2019 expanded the Residential
Incentive Overlay Zoning District to several sites to expand and encourage
multifamily housing within close proximity to the Wellesley Square
Commuter Rail Station. That zoning resulted in 26 units at 148 Weston
Road, plus 2 affordable units on an adjacent site. The second project is at
the Terrazza at the former Delanson Circle site which resulted in 35 units
with 4 affordable on an adjacent site. There is a new proposal for the
Annual Town Meeting to place a Residential Incentive Overlay district over
an existing 14 acre site currently owned and operated by the Sisters of
Charity. The HPP encouraged the redevelopment of office parks, and the
40R district does just that redeveloping the Wellesley Office Park with the
40R District. Additionally, the Town is working with a team of Boston
College Seniors on a Real Estate Capstone Project to reimagine another
office park area along the Charles River. The Town adopted an accessory
dwelling unit provision at the 2022 Annual Town Meeting, and we continue
to await the first project to come through. The Town's Housing
Development Corporation in 2022 recently conducted an affordable
housing market study to determine where deficiencies exist in the market,
and has several multifamily projects previously approved through 40B
under construction. 
The Town also has the Unified Plan "UP" (adopted in 2019) which is both
the Town's Comprehensive Plan and the Town's strategic plan. The UP
also called for Accessory Dwelling Units, increased density, and diversity of
housing types in appropriate locations. Given the duration of the UP
process, the UP also called for adoption of the Housing Production Plan,
which was achieved nearly simultaneously to the UP. As part of the UP, the
Town further focused on public transportation to improve accessibility
between multifamily housing and places of work and the broader commuter
networks. The UP recommended an RFP for use of two town lots known as
the Tailby and Railroad Commuter Parking Lots. The Town did release the
RFP for those sites and was in negotiation with a developer, however the
Town determined some reimagination was necessary on moving forward
with that particular project. The UP also called for the study and analysis of
the Wellesley Housing Authority land known as Barton Road. The CPC did
fund a feasibility study, and next steps are currently being contemplated. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
2.2. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning for
housing?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe the
housing work underway.
In addition to preparing to meet the MBTA Communities requirements, the
Town is working to expand housing density within the existing 40R District
at Wellesley Office Park and has a Warrant Article for the Annual Town
Meeting to rezone a 14 acre parcel with a Residential Incentive Overlay.
The Town is also working closely with a developer on a plan to redevelop a
series of single family residential parcels that were aggregated to rezone
for upwards of 70 housing units within walking distance to Wellesley Hills
Commuter Rail Station. The Town is also working with a developer who
has acquired a 9 acre parcel split between Wellesley and Natick on an
assisted living and memory care project site. This will require rezoning in
both Natick and Wellesley. The Town has capital funds to study the Cedar
Street/ Route 9 Commercial District which will encompass commercial,
residential, and housing authority land. The Town anticipates a
redevelopment of existing commercial into mixed use housing project in
2023.
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1.	To the best of your knowledge,
which of the following zoning strategies
is this community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that apply)
a. An existing zoning district or districts that might already comply with the
Section 3A Guidelines
b. An existing zoning district or districts that must be amended to comply
with the Section 3A Guidelines
e. Other zoning strategy
3.1a. Please identify and briefly describe
the possibly-compliant district(s),
including any characteristics of existing
development or transit options that
make it suitable for use as this
community's 3A-compliant district.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents.
Wellesley has the following districts that are compliant: Wellesley Park
Smart Growth Overlay District (40R District), Wellesley Square Commercial
District, Business Districts, Business A Districts, Industrial Districts,
Industrial A Districts, and the Residential Incentive Overlay District, Limited
Apartment Districts, and Lower Falls Village Commercial. The density for
these districts is identified in Area Regulations Section 5.2.C.2 and 3 as
2500 square feet of land per each housekeeping unit which equates to 17
units per acre. In the Wellesley Square Commercial District (via Special
Permit) and Residential Incentive Overlay Districts (as of right) that can
further be increased to 24 units per acre as it states there is a requirement
for 1800 square feet of land per each housekeeping unit. 
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14093944001
3.1b. Please select the changes that
may be necessary for the existing
district to comply. Optional: Attach any
supporting documents that describe
this district.
Parking requirements
Other: Project Approval Regulations

===== PAGE 5 =====
Explanation:
The Town of Wellesley, under Project Approval, has three primary review
functions. The first is an advisory Design Review component with a Design
Review Board. The second, unlike many communities, is a special permit
issued by the Planning Board that reviews the offsite impacts to seven
capital infrastructure components including Water, Sewer, Stormwater,
Electric, Traffic and Pedestrian Safety, Fire and Life Safety, and Refuse. In
consultation with DHCD, they have indicated this special permit is a barrier
to housing and therefore not allowed. The third component is site plan
review issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals for architecture,
landscaping, lighting, interior circulation, ingress, egress, construction
management, etc. Under the Town's 40R provisions the Town had to
modify this process to a streamlined site plan review for the housing
components. The team is currently evaluating how to address site plan
review to meet the MBTA communities designation. 
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14093944004
3.1e. Please briefly explain the strategy.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents that show planning work
this community has already done for
this strategy.
The Town's current strategy is to evaluate the existing 40R Site Plan
Review for housing and Project of Significant Impact provisions for
non-housing related projects. Please see 40R Site Plan Review
procedures. We may also seek to rezone the Tailby Parking Lot and a
property at 27 Linden Street to create connectivity between Wellesley
Square Commercial District and Industrial zoned properties along Linden
Street. The rezoning of the Tailby Parking Lot will create connectivity
between two ripe areas for development of housing around the Wellesley
Square Commuter Rail station. In addition to connecting the zoning, the
current multi-unit zoning on Tailby and 27 Linden has an age restriction
requirements that must be removed in order to meet the provisions of 3A.
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/14093944006

===== PAGE 6 =====
3.2. What non-housing characteristics
are important for this community to
consider in its 3A zoning district?
The Town has recently completed a Climate Action Plan (CAP) and a
Sustainable Mobility Plan (SMP). In addition to meeting housing objectives,
the Town continues to support our thriving commercial districts located in
Wellesley Square, Linden Square, Wellesley Hills, Lower Falls, Wellesley
Fells, Washington and State Street, Walnut Street Corridor, and Cedar
Street corridors. We strive to have proper alternative modes of
transportation for residents of all ages. The  The Town is incrementally
working to reduce all bus fees for school age children over a 5 year period
and works with the MWRTA for both fixed route and micro transit services.
The Town has worked over the past 18 months to expand the use of micro
transit and currently ridership is at an all-time high. The Town is working
closely with the MBTA to continue the clock face scheduling, and more
importantly to bring the Town's 3 commuter rail stations into compliance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act. As the Commonwealth mandates
high density within proximity to MBTA stations, the mandate must also be
on the Commonwealth to make this critical infrastructure accessible to all.
Wellesley at this time has ZERO ADA compliant stations. The Town has
invested in maintaining a complex series of trails and open spaces that
provide enjoyment and enhancement to locations supporting multi-unit
structures and residential areas. The Town is currently working to improve
and/or reimagine the Wellesley Square Amenities including pedestrian,
bike, and placemaking aspects including gathering space, lighting,
landscaping, public art, benches, trash receptacles, etc.The Town
continues to prioritize safe routes to school and routes to the Commuter
stations for pedestrians and bicyclists. The Town is working to meet
greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals to reduce to zero net GHG
emissions by 2050  as mandated by a Town Meeting directive and Climate
Action Plan. The Town is currently seeking 2023 Annual Town Meeting
passage of the opt-in stretch code to reduce reliance on fossil fuels.  The
Town has a Municipal Light Plant, which, with goals of electrification,
maintains some of the most favorable electric rates in the Commonwealth.
The Town is also working to approve use of the PACE program to further
allow for sustainable borrowing to enhance existing multi-unit
redevelopment projects. 
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline

===== PAGE 7 =====
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a zoning
adoption process. On the table below, please use Column 1 (from the left)
to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date, and Column 3 to input a
finish date. Every community must provide a timeline for the below-listed
tasks. &nbsp;Additional space is provided for any other tasks that a
community wishes to list. DHCD will review proposed timelines for
feasibility before approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public
outreachDeveloping zoning&nbsp;Applying DHCD's compliance model to
test for density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to DHCD
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Finalize proposed zoning modifications
Jan 01, 2023
Jun 15, 2023
Short Answer
Apply Compliance Model To test Density and Capacity
Jan 01, 2023
Mar 15, 2023
Short Answer
Board Discussions with Planning and SB
May 01, 2022
Jun 30, 2023
Short Answer
Hold Planning Board Public Hearings
Sep 01, 2023
Oct 01, 2023
Short Answer
Adopt Zoning Proposal
Oct 15, 2023
Oct 31, 2023
Short Answer
Submit Compliance to DHCD
Nov 15, 2023
Dec 31, 2023
