
===== PAGE 40 =====
 
 
40 
 
Commission, to be released in whole upon issuance of a Certificate of Compliance (COC) for work 
performed pursuant to the permit that has been recorded with the Registry of Deeds.  
B. 
By accepting a conservation restriction, easement, or other covenant enforceable in a court of law, 
executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of this 
municipality whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before any lot may be 
conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method shall be used only with the consent of the 
applicant.  
 
SECTION 10  
 ENFORCEMENT 
A. No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise alter resource areas 
protected by this bylaw, or cause, suffer, or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, 
or otherwise fail to restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply with a 
permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this bylaw.  
B. 
The Conservation Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter 
upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this bylaw and may 
make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the Commission deems 
necessary, subject to the constitutions and laws of the United States and the Commonwealth.  
C. 
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this bylaw, its regulations, and permits issued 
thereunder by letters, phone calls, electronic communication and other informal methods, violation 
notices, noncriminal citations under MGL Ch. 40 § 21D, and civil and criminal court actions. Any 
person who violates provisions of this bylaw may be ordered to restore the property to its original 
condition and take other action deemed necessary to remedy such violations and/or may be fined.  
D. Upon request of the Commission, the Select Board and Town Counsel shall take legal action for 
enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the Commission, the Chief of Police shall take legal 
action for enforcement under criminal law.  
E. 
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having police powers, 
shall have authority to assist the Commission in enforcement.  
F. 
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw, the accompanying regulations, permits, or 
administrative orders issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300 per 
offense. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues, or unauthorized fill or 
other alteration remains in place, shall constitute a separate offense, and each provision of the 
bylaw, regulations, permits, or administrative orders violated shall constitute a separate offense.  
G. As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a specific case, the Commission may issue citations 
with specific penalties pursuant to the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL Ch. 40 
§ 21D, which has been adopted within Article 31 of the Town Bylaws.  
 
SECTION 11  
 BURDEN OF PROOF 
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the credible evidence 
that the work proposed in the application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative effect 
upon the resource area values protected by this bylaw. Failure to provide adequate evidence to the 
Conservation Commission supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a 
permit or grant a permit with conditions. 
 
SECTION 12  
APPEALS 
A decision of the Conservation Commission shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an action filed 
within 60 days thereof, in accordance with MGL Ch. 249 § 4, as amended. 
 
SECTION 13  
SEVERABILITY 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or 
provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or decision previously issued. 
 
Or take any other action thereon. 
 
Article Information: The current version in effect and a red-line edited version of proposed changes are 
available with the Conservation Department and the Town Clerk as well as online.  The motion for this 
article requires a simple majority vote. 
 
MOTION:  Andy Koenigsberg, 3 Smith Street, Chair-Conservation Commission:  I move the article 
as printed in the warrant. 
 
DISCUSSION: Jennifer Miller, Conservation Director, said the reason they don’t have the article in the 

===== PAGE 41 =====
 
 
41 
 
warrant as a “strike-out” but as the amended version is because there was a lot of restructuring, so the content 
stayed very much the same but it’s been restructured so it’s easier to understand. Tables have been added 
instead of long paragraphs of information. Performance standards were moved (how you go about proposing 
a project in different types of wetland areas) to the regulations which is where it belongs and not in the 
bylaw. Background: Bylaw was adopted in 2008. They are typically updated in most communities every 10 
years. The original bylaw is lengthy, wordy, and can be confusing. A sub-committee of the Conservation 
Commission worked over several months on the bylaw to revise the document and see what should move to 
regulations. The final draft went through a public hearing process which was properly noticed.  
 
Joe McManus, Isaac Miller Road: In favor of environmental protection. He asked why the Town has to 
be more stringent than the state is. 
 
Jennifer Miller: The Wetlands Protection Act and 310 CMR are broad and give basic purview to the 
Conservation Commissions throughout Massachusetts. Most municipalities fee it is important to have 
additional and more stringent local protections.  
 
Andrew Koenigsberg, 3 Smith Street, Conservation Commission: The bylaw just allows the 
Conservation Commission to write regulations. The intent of the bylaw has not changed; it is 
reorganized and written better.   
 
Also rising in debate of Article 32: 
Paul George, 19 Robin Road 
Donald Gilbert, 26 Charles Street 
Elizabeth Hawes, 16 Upton Road 
 
Felicia Vaytsman, 27 West Street: Moved the question. 
 
Vote to Terminate Debate: 268 in favor and 34 opposed. 2/3 Vote. Debate is terminated. 
 
VOTE on Main Motion: 290 in favor and 20 opposed. Majority vote. Motion carries. 
 
 
ARTICLE 32: Amend Zoning Bylaw and Zoning Map - MBTA Communities Multi-family 
Overlay District (Planning Board) 
To see if Town will vote to amend the Westborough Zoning Bylaws to establish a Multi-Family 
Housing Overlay District in compliance with the Commonwealth’s Multi-Family Housing Requirement 
for MBTA Communities (M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3A), as follows: (1) add to Section 4.0 (Zoning 
Districts) the MBTA Communities Multi-Family Zoning Overlay District (MCMOD); (2) add to Section 
4.2 (Official Zoning Map) the MBTA Communities Multi-Family Zoning Overlay District, which 
consists of three overlay subdistricts.  The amendments will be as follows (deletions are shown in 
strikeout and additions in bold italics for emphasis only).  
  
1. 
Add to Section 4.1 (Establishment of Districts), the following:  
  
MBTA Communities Multi-family 
Overlay District  
MCMOD (See § 4.11)  
 0000000000000000000000000002  
2. 
Amend the official zoning map referenced in Section 4.2 to include the following overlay 
districts:  
  
MBTA Multi-family Districts  
1. MF District 1 Gleason Street  
2. MF District 2 Turnpike Road A  
3. MF District 3 Turnpike Road B  
  
3. 
Add Section 4.11 MBTA Communities Multi-Family Zoning Overlay District as follows 
(all language is new, but not shown in bold italics)  
  
A. Purpose  
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) is to allow multi- 
family housing as of right in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General Laws 
Chapter 40A). The requirements set forth herein shall be applied so as to encourage the development of 

===== PAGE 42 =====
 
 
42 
 
multi-family housing projects of a scale, density and aesthetic that are compatible with existing 
surrounding uses and minimize impacts to sensitive land. To the extent possible, multi-family housing 
shall allow for safe, accessible, and convenient access to transit stations for pedestrians and bicyclists.  
  
B. Scope and Authority  
This MCMOD is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 95.59 gross acres in size that is 
superimposed over the underlying zoning district(s) and is shown on the Zoning Map.  
  
1. 
Sub-districts. The boundaries of the MCMOD are depicted on the Zoning Map on file 
with the Town Clerk. The MCMOD is further divided into three subdistricts: Gleason Street 
Subdistrict, Turnpike Road A Subdistrict, and Turnpike Road B Subdistrict, as depicted on the 
Zoning Map and described herein.  
2. 
Applicability of MCMOD. The provisions of the Multi-Family Housing Overlay 
District (MCMOD) shall apply to all land within the MCMOD and shall apply uniformly to all 
subdistricts except as expressly distinguished in this Article. Any matter not addressed herein 
shall be governed by the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw applicable to underlying zoning 
districts. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of the MCMOD and any other 
provisions of the Zoning Bylaw, the provisions of the MCMOD shall govern. The provisions of 
this Zoning Bylaw pertaining to those zoning districts underlying this overlay district shall 
remain in effect.  
3. 
Underlying Zoning. The MCMOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying 
zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning 
Bylaw governing the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except 
for uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in 
Section 4.11 (D) are governed by the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).  
  
C. Definitions. For purposes of this Section 4.11, the following definitions shall apply.  
  
1. 
Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded 
in its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or 
household of a specified income, or both.  
2. 
Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this Section 
4.11 (C).  
3. 
Applicant. A person, business, or organization that applies for a building permit, Site 
Plan Review, or Special Permit.  
4. 
Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan statistical 
region that includes the Town of Westborough, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD).  
5. 
As of right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in place at time of 
application without the need for a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other 
discretionary zoning approval.  
6. 
Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-Family Zoning Districts 
Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as further revised or amended from time to time.  
7. 
EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Livable Communities, or 
any successor agency.  
8. 
Development standards. Provisions of Section K. General Development Standards 
made applicable to projects within the MCMOD.  
9. 
Lot. An area of land with definite boundaries that is used or available for use as the site 
of a building or buildings.  
10. 
MBTA. Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.  
11. 
Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of residential uses and non- 
residential uses, including, commercial, institutional, or other uses.  
12. 
Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential dwelling units or two or 
more buildings on the same lot with more than one residential dwelling unit in each building.  
13. 
Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base district or an overlay 
district, in which multi-family housing is allowed as of right.  
14. 
Residential dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities 
for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking. 
and sanitation.  
15. 
Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act.  
16. 
Site plan review authority. Planning Board.  
17. 
Sub-district. An area within the MCMOD that is geographically smaller than the 
MCMOD district and differentiated from the rest of the district by use, dimensional standards, 
or development standards.  

===== PAGE 43 =====
 
 
43 
 
18. 
Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units 
maintained by DHCD used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate- income 
housing for the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law.  
19. 
Transit station. An MBTA subway station, commuter rail station, or ferry terminal.  
a. Commuter rail station. Any MBTA commuter rail station with year-round, rather than 
intermittent, seasonal, or event-based, service.  
b. Ferry terminal. The location where passengers embark and disembark from regular, 
year-round MBTA ferry service.  
c. Subway station. Any of the stops along the MBTA Red Line, Green Line, Orange Line, 
or Blue Line.  
  
D. Uses Permitted As of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the MCMOD.  
  
a. 
Multi-family housing.  
b. 
Mixed-use development. Development under this section may include a mixture of uses, 
combining those already allowed in the zone and those multifamily housing uses allowed by 
special permit pursuant to the Zoning Bylaws.  However, no mixed-use development shall have 
industrial uses in the same building, or on the same lot, as residential uses.  
  
E. Site Plan Review. Site plan review shall apply to all uses in the MCMOD in accordance with 
Section 3.0 Site Plan Review of the Westborough Zoning Bylaw.  Section K (General Development 
Standards) will be used as the criteria in the Site Plan Review process.  
  
F. Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning 
Bylaw, the dimensional requirements applicable in the MCMOD are as follows:  
  
Standard  
Gleason Street  
Turnpike Road A  
Turnpike Road B  
Minimum Lot Size  
10,000 SF  
15,000 SF  
15,000 SF  
Building Height  
4 stories  
4 stories  
4 stories  
Lot Coverage  
60%  
60%  
60%  
Minimum Open Space 
Requirement  
40%  
40%  
40%  
Minimum Lot 
Frontage  
125 ft  
125 ft  
125 ft  
Front yard Setback  
25 ft  
25 ft  
25 ft  
Side yard Setback  
15 ft  
25 ft  
25 ft  
Rear yard Setback  
25 ft  
25 ft  
25 ft  
Maximum Dwelling 
Units per Acre 
(DU/AC)  
12 DU/AC  
14 DU/AC  
40 DU/AC  
  
G. Multi-Building Lots. In the MCMOD, lots may have more than one principal building.  
  
H. Exceptions. The limitation on height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, ventilators, 
towers, silos, spires, or other ornamental features of buildings, which features are in no way used for 
living purposes and do not constitute more than 25% of the ground floor area of the building.  
  
I. Exceptions: Renewable Energy Installations. The Site Plan Review Authority or Special 
Permit Granting Authority may waive the height and setbacks in Section 4.11 (F) Dimensional 
Standards to accommodate the installation of solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, living, and other eco-
roofs, energy storage, and air-source heat pump equipment. Such installations shall not create a 
significant detriment to abutters in terms of noise or shadow and must be appropriately integrated into 
the architecture of the building and the layout of the site. The installations shall not provide additional 
habitable space within the development.  
  
J. Off-Street Parking. These parking requirements are applicable to development in the MCMOD.  
  
1. 
Number of parking spaces. The following maximum numbers of off-street parking 
spaces shall be permitted by use, either in surface parking or within garages or other structures:  
  
Use  
Maximum Spaces  
Multi-family  
2 spaces per Residential Dwelling
Unit  

===== PAGE 45 =====
 
 
45 
 
b. Paved pedestrian access from the residential component shall be provided to residential 
parking and amenities and to the public sidewalk, as applicable.  
c. Materials for non-residential uses shall be stored inside or under cover and shall not be 
accessible to residents of the development.  
d. Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized so as to reduce the amount of 
impervious surface. Where possible, parking and loading areas shall be connected to 
minimize curb cuts onto public rights-of-way.  
  
5. 
Buildings: Shared Outdoor Space. Multi-family housing and mixed-use development 
shall have common outdoor space that all residents can access. Such space may be located in any 
combination of ground floor, courtyard, rooftop, or terrace. All outdoor space shall count towards 
the project’s minimum Open Space requirement.  
  
6. 
Buildings: Principal Façade and Parking. Parking shall be subordinate in design and 
location to the principal building façade.  
a. Surface parking. Surface parking shall be located to the rear or side of the principal 
building. Parking shall not be located in the setback between the building and any lot line 
adjacent to the public right-of-way.  
b. Integrated garages. The principal pedestrian entry into the building shall be more 
prominent in design and placement than the vehicular entry into the garage.  
c. Parking structures. Building(s) dedicated to structured parking on the same lot as one or 
more multi-family buildings or mixed-use development shall be subordinate in design and 
placement to the multi-family or mixed-use building(s) on the lot.  
  
7. 
Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant and subject to compliance with the 
Compliance Guidelines, the Site Plan Review Authority may waive the requirements of this 
Section K. General Development Standards, in the interests of design flexibility and overall 
project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of such variation with the overall purpose and 
objectives of the MCMOD.  
  
L. Affordability Requirements  
1. 
Purpose.  
a. Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by encouraging a diversity of housing 
opportunities for people of different income levels;  
b. Provide for a full range of housing choices for households of all incomes, ages, and sizes; 
and  
c. Increase the production of affordable housing units to meet existing and anticipated 
housing needs.  
  
2. 
Applicability. This requirement is applicable to all residential and mixed-use 
developments with ten (10) or more dwelling units, whether new construction, substantial 
rehabilitation, expansion, or reconstruction. No project may be divided or phased to avoid the 
requirements of this section.  
  
3. 
Affordability requirements.  
a. Subsidized Housing Inventory. All units affordable to households earning 80% or less 
of AMI created in the MCMOD under this section must be eligible for listing on EOHLC’s 
Subsidized Housing Inventory.   
b. Provision of Affordable Housing. In Applicable Projects, not fewer than 20% of 
housing units constructed shall be Affordable Housing Units. For purposes of calculating the 
number of units of Affordable Housing required within a development project, a fractional 
unit shall be rounded down to the next whole number. The Affordable Units shall be 
available to households earning income up to 80% of the AMI.  
  
4. 
Development Standards. Affordable Units shall be:  
a. Integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, 
appearance, construction, and quality of exterior and interior materials with the other units 
and/or lots;  
b. Dispersed throughout the development;  
c. Located such that the units have equal access to shared amenities, including light and air, 
and utilities (including any bicycle storage and/or Electric Vehicle charging stations) within 
the development;  
d. Located such that the units have equal avoidance of any potential nuisances as market-
rate units within the development;  
e. Distributed proportionately among unit sizes; and  
f. Distributed proportionately across each phase of a phased development.  

===== PAGE 46 =====
 
 
46 
 
g. Occupancy permits may be issued for market-rate units prior to the end of construction of 
the entire development provided that occupancy permits for Affordable Units are issued 
simultaneously on a pro rata basis.  
  
5. 
Administration.  
The Zoning Enforcement Officer/Building Commissioner shall be responsible for administering and 
enforcing the requirements in this section.  
  
M. Severability. If any provision of Section 4.11 is found to be invalid by a court of competent 
jurisdiction, the remainder of Section 4.11 shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. The 
invalidity of any provision of this Section 4.11 shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the 
Town of Westborough’s Zoning.  
  
  
Article Information: This article updates the zoning bylaw to bring Westborough into compliance with the 
MBTA Communities Multifamily Zoning requirements under Section 3A of the Zoning Ac (the “Guidelines”). 
The Guidelines require Towns that the EOHLC has designated as a “Commuter Rail Community” to submit 
zoning that is in accord with the Guidelines to the EOHLC by December 31, 2024.   
  
Since the Guidelines were released, the Planning Department and Planning Board have worked closely together 
to develop zoning that complies with this new law. Through a technical assistance grant, the Town hired a 
consultant, RKG Associates, to complete a Compliance Analysis and Economic Feasibility Analysis.   
  
The Guidelines further required that the district(s) must total at least 50 acres in size with 50% of the total 
acreage comprising contiguous land. At least 20% of the district acreage must be located within the half-mile 
transit station area. No single district can be smaller than 5 acres in size.  
  
Using the MBTA Communities Compliance Model, the three subdistricts proposed were tested. Based on each 
districts’ location, size, and zoning parameters it was found that the current configuration of these three districts 
and the associated zoning parameters will provide Westborough with enough land area, units, and density to 
exceed the requirements of Section 3A. There is also enough land and unit capacity within the half-mile transit 
station area to exceed the specific station area requirements.  
  
MOTION: Mark Silverberg, 7 Weld Street, Chair-Planning Board: I move the article as printed in the 
warrant, with the following amendments: 
 
 
Insert the following sentence at the end of Section 4.11 (B) (3): 
“uses allowed as of right in the MCMOD shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 
6.1 and shall not require a separate special permit under Section 4.3 if located within the 
Aquifer and Watershed Protection District.” 
 
Insert the following sentence at the end of Section 4.11 (C) (14): 
“A residential dwelling unit shall not be age-restricted or restricted on the number of 
bedrooms, the size of bedrooms, or the number of occupants.” 
 
 
Insert the following sentence at the end of Section 4.11(E):  
 
 
“Site plan review for as-of-right uses in the MCMOD may not be denied.” 
 
 
And insert the following sentence at the end of Section 4.11 (L) (3) (b): 
 
 
“If EOHLC determines in writing that the Town has not shown this 20% requirement to  
 
 
be feasible, at least 10% of housing units constructed, or such greater percentage as  
 
 
approved by EOHLC in writing, shall be Affordable Housing Units.” 
 
 
 
DISCUSSION: Mark Silverberg, 7 Weld Street, Chair-Planning Boad: Reported that on Tuesday, February 
20, 2024, after two public hearings, the Planning Board unanimously voted 5-0 to recommend that the Town 
Meeting approve Article 32 to amend the zoning bylaws and zoning map to allow multi-family zoning by 
adding a new section 4.11 and establishing multi-family zoning overlay districts on the zoning map.  
 
Moderator Arnold pointed out that this article requires a majority vote. It used to be that zoning bylaws were 
two-thirds; however, the legislature changed it so that towns for specific types of zoning especially related to 
multi-family housing now has reduced the quantum of vote for particular classification of bylaws to majority 
vote.    
 

===== PAGE 47 =====
 
 
47 
 
Jenny Gingras, Director of Planning: “MBTA community” is defined by G.L. c. 161A, section 1. 
Westborough is classified as a Commuter Rail Community. In total, 177 communities are subject to the new 
requirements of Section 3A of the Zoning Act. Section 3A requires that an MBTA Community shall provide 
for at least one district of reasonable size in which multi-family housing is permitted as of right. The state 
made the deadline to comply December 31, 2024. As-of-Right Zoning means a development can proceed 
without a special permit, variance or other special permission from the Planning Board or Zoning Board of 
Appeal. However, a building permit and review by other departments is still required. The bylaw can still 
require a site plan review can be required for as of right multi-family uses but the Planning Board cannot 
impose unreasonable requirements or delays on the project. The districts we have for multi-family are 
Gateway 2, Downtown Planning Overlay District, Transit-Oriented Village, Mixed Use District and Senior 
Living Overlay District. We are doing this because none of our zoning districts that we allow for multi-
family meet the state’s new requirements: we cannot require a special permit. If the Town does not comply 
with the requirements from the state under 3A we will be ineligible for grant programs. The Attorney 
General has said this law is not optional. The state requires 15% of the 8,334 housing units Westborough has 
to be the minimum multi-family unit capacity. Other requirements, 20% have to be located in the Station 
area; and the minimum gross density needed to be 15 dwelling units per acre. In doing so, identified 3 
different districts: District 1: Geason Street. District 2: Turnpike Road A (Parc Westborough) District 3 
Turnpike Road B (Arrive). Found that Westborough does comply using the 3 Districts and count toward the 
units we need to have. Ms. Gingras said she does not expect that there will be an increase in Westborough’s 
housing stock due to the existing housing being in those districts. The Planning Board is also exploring other 
opportunities to expand housing options and diversify housing stock, i.e.: doing a housing production plan 
where they are looking at the graphics and the housing need projected in the next five years, looking at 
zoning and requirements under the special permit process.  
 
VOTE: 283 in favor and 15 opposed. 2/3 vote (even though a majority only is required). Motion 
carries. 
 
 
ARTICLE 33: Fund Afro Caribbean Festival (By Petition) 
Afro Caribbean Festival  
To see if the Town will vote to transfer from Free Cash the sum of Three Thousand Five Hundred 
Dollars ($3,500), or such other amount as the Town Meeting may approve, for the annual Afro 
Caribbean festival at Bay State Commons celebration to be expended by the Westborough Afro 
Caribbean festival at Bay State Commons Committee under the direction of the Select Board, or take 
any other action thereon. To be held at the end of August or beginning of September 2024. 
 
Article Information  This article pays the cost for the annual Afro-Caribbean Festival's celebration. The 
motion for this article requires a simple majority vote. Afro-Caribbean Festival's mission is to celebrate, 
showcase, heritage and promote local and international talents from the Afro-Caribbean Diaspora. We 
are excited to announce our 1st annual Afro-Caribbean Cultural Festival 2024, which we will be 
celebrating and is taking place at the end of August or beginning of September 2024. The Afro-
Caribbean Cultural Festival is a step towards the elimination of discrimination, racism, and prejudice. It 
is festivals and events like these that are beneficial in promoting community support, multiculturalism, 
and equity initiatives. This interaction, through the inclusion and welcoming of diverse Americans, will 
help to increase participants' sense of belonging and attachment to America. Porta potties, police, fire, 
ambulance, dj, electrical power. 
 
MOTION: Boyd Conklin, 8 Water Street: I move that the Town vote to transfer from Free Cash the sum 
of Three Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($3,500) for the annual Afro Caribbean festival at Bay State 
Commons celebration to be expended by the Westborough Afro Caribbean festival at Bay State 
Commons Committee under the direction of the Select Board to be held at the end of August or 
beginning of September 2024. 
 
Discussion: Donald Gilbert, 26 Charles Street: There is a large portion of the population of new Americans 
may be from Haiti; thinks this is a fun idea.  
 
Carolyn Spring, 12 Deerslayer Lane: A longtime member of Westborough Cultural Council and requested 
that the proponents, once they have a budget, venue and date they apply for a grant as an alternate funding 
source. 
 
Also rising to debate Article 33: 
Felicia Vaytsman, 27 West Street 
Jonathan Rappaport, 7 Brady Road 

===== PAGE 48 =====
 
 
48 
 
 
VOTE: 25 in favor and 338 opposed. Motion defeated. 
 
 
ARTICLE 34: Removal of LGBTQ+ iconography from Westborough Schools (By Petition) 
Removal of lgbtq+ iconography from Westborough Schools . To see if the town will vote on a non-
binding petition to remove lgbtq+ iconography from Westborough Schools. Political organizational 
messages and/or social organizational movements flyers/stickers/iconography/murals/banners/flags have 
no place in Westborough Schools. 
 
Article Information   Room 39 at Gibbons Middle School is an outlandish example of the horrific 
indoctrination/grooming occurring in Westborough schools, we have toured the site with Amber Bock 
superintendent but were not allowed to photo document the tour. A photo documentation has been done 
in the hallways of Westborough High School and the photos can be found at 
https://flickr.com/photos/34200761@N03/ boydconklin For the seventy foot long six foot high lgbt 
rainbow banner transgender white pink blue banner mural here is the link: 
https://flickr.com/photos/34200761@N03/53240313793/in/dateposted-public/ The grooming continues 
at Westborough Schools and now 22% of Westborough High School students identify as lgbtq+. Why 
should there be hundreds of advertizements for lgbtq+ distributed thoughout the Westborough schools, 
to our most vulnerable children/youth who can be easily groomed into lgbtq+ as can be seen by the ever 
increasing percentages it captures. We don't advertize cigarettes in the school, why is lgbtq+ allowed to 
be advertized relentlessly. No one is asking for the persecution of lgbtq+, we are asking for the removal 
of the lgbtq+ promotional materials, as has been done in all town owned buildings. 
https://www.zerohedge.com/political/almost-30-gen-z-adults-claim-theyre-queer-new-poll-finds And 
finally, Gen Z adults are significantly more likely than older generations to identify as gay, lesbian, 
bisexual, or something else, with 28% identifying as LGBTQ, compared with 16% of millennials, 7% of 
Generation X, 4% of baby boomers, and 4% of the Silent Generation.In other words, the queerness of 
society is approximately doubling every generation." Why? Advertizing/grooming/indoctrination. 
 
MOTION:  Boyd Conklin, 8 Water Street: I move that the Town Meeting supports a resolution to 
remove LGBTQ+ iconography from Westborough Schools. 
 
DISCUSSION: Boyd Conlin said no group should have preferential advertising in our schools.  
 
Moderator Arnold: The Diversity and Inclusion Committee 4-0-0 to oppose this article. 
 
Nathan Walsh, 3 Mathieu Drive, Board of Health: The Board of Health voted 3-0 in opposition of this 
article. He said the LGBTQ iconography is potentially beneficial to the mental health and well-being of the 
students.  
 
Rising to debate Article 34: 
Paul George, 19 Robin Road 
Jodi Hensley, 39 Arch Street 
Donald Gilbert, 36 Charles Street 
Natalie Chase, 10 Old Colony Drive 
Also speaking: Amber Bock, School Superintendent 
 
VOTE: 24 in favor and 313 opposed. Motion is defeated. 
 
Jonathan Rappaport, 7 Brady Road: Made a Point of order and made a motion that the remaining 
articles all be voted on together with one vote. Moderator Arnold replied that the warrant isn’t 
structured to allow a vote on all at once; and, they are on a wide variety of topics. Although he could 
see that many people may vote all one way or the other the only way he could do that would be to block 
them together and then as done with the budget and capital articles, go through each one to see if they 
are questioned, and, he believes they would be. Therefore, his belief is that the most effective way to do 
this is to keep remarks to a minimum and move to a vote and we have adequately handled the process.  
 
ARTICLE 35: End Westborough Schools’ Anti-Racism Initiatives (By Petition) 
To see if the Town will vote on a non-binding petition to end Westborough Schools' anti-racism 
initiatives or take any other action thereon. 
 
