
===== PAGE 1 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
1 
Proposed Multi-Family Zoning Section to Comply with the MBTA Communities Act 
Planning Board Public Hearing Draft, March 21, 2024 
 
8.4 
MBTA Communities Multi-family Housing Overlay 
8.4.1. Purpose 
The purpose of the MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay 
District (MCMOD) is to allow multi-family housing as-of-right 
in accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts 
General Laws Chapter 40A). The MCMOD provides for as-of-
right multi-family housing to accomplish the following 
purposes: 
8.4.1.1. To increase the supply of housing in West Newbury.  
8.4.1.2. To increase the diversity of housing in West Newbury 
so that it better meets the needs of people across age 
groups, abilities, household compositions, and income 
levels.  
8.4.1.3. To ensure that multi-family housing minimizes harm to 
environmental, historic, and cultural resources. 
8.4.1.4. To ensure that the design of sites and buildings for 
multi-family housing supports a good quality of life for 
occupants and abutters through:  
a. efficient and attractive site circulation that balances 
the needs of all modes of travel,  
b. environmentally sustainable public and private open 
spaces that fulfill specific ecological, recreational, or 
scenic functions,  
c. durable buildings whose massing, and placement 
shapes human-scaled streets and open spaces while 
reflecting local building vernacular,  
d. and parking that is convenient but that does not 
dominate the experience of the site.  
8.4.1.5. To allow new homes in locations with adequate public 
infrastructure including streets, sidewalks, and water 
infrastructure.  
8.4.1.6. To increase the municipal tax base through private 
investment in new residential developments. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
2 
8.4.1.7. To support the vibrancy of West Newbury’s village 
center by allowing new homes close to it. 
8.4.2.  Establishment and Applicability 
8.4.2.1. The MCMOD is an overlay district. It is superimposed 
over the underlying zoning district(s) and is shown on 
the Zoning Map. It includes:  
a. Parcel number 001U 0000 00380, otherwise known 
as 317 Main Street, with a land area of approximately 
14.78 acres, and 
b. Parcel number 0020 0000 00410, otherwise known 
as 187 Main Street, with a land area of approximately 
19 acres. 
8.4.2.2. Applicability of MCMOD. An applicant may develop 
multi-family housing located within a MCMOD in 
accordance with the provisions of this Section 8.4. Any 
project proposed under this Section must include 
multi-family housing. 
8.4.2.3. The provisions of this section apply only to 
developments on land located within a MCMOD 
where the property owner has elected to comply with 
the requirements of the overlay district, rather than 
complying with those of the underlying zoning district. 
8.4.2.4. Relationship to Underlying Zoning. Provisions of this 
section supersede those of the underlying zoning. If 
there is a conflict between the provisions of this 
section and provisions found elsewhere in the Zoning 
Bylaw, the provisions of this section shall apply. All 
other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing the 
respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in 
full force, except that no special permit shall be 
required for multi-family housing, or any accessory 
use typically associated with multi-family housing, in a 
MCMOD. Uses that are not identified in Section 8.4 
are governed by the requirements of the underlying 
zoning district(s). 
8.4.3. Definitions. 
For purposes of this Section 8.4, the following definitions shall 
apply. All other specialized terms shall be defined by Section 2 
of this Bylaw.  

===== PAGE 3 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
3 
As-of-right. Development that may proceed under the Zoning in 
place at time of application without the need for a special 
permit, variance, zoning amendment, waiver, or other 
discretionary zoning approval. 
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or 
sheltering any use or occupancy. 
Building Type, Apartment Building. A residential building 
containing dwelling units arranged around a central hallway. 
Apartment buildings typically have more than one story, but 
dwelling units do not typically span more than one story.  
Building Type, Mixed-Use. A building containing both 
residential uses and non- residential uses, including, 
commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses.  
Building Type, Stacked Flats. A medium-sized residential 
building. Dwelling units may have individual entrances or may 
share an entrance, stairway and/or short hallway. The building 
may have entrances on multiple sides to serve groups of 
dwelling units. Dwelling units are typically stacked on top of 
each other but may occupy more than one story.  
Building Type, 3-5 Family. A small multi-family residential 
building with three to five residential dwelling units. Dwelling 
units may have individual entrances or may share an entrance, 
stairway and/or short hallway. The building may have entrances 
on multiple sides to serve groups of dwelling units. Dwelling 
units may be side-by-side, above-and-below, front-to-back, or 
in another arrangement. Units may occupy more than one story. 
This building type includes townhouses which have the 
following characteristics: units are arranged side-by-side 
separated by common walls, units typically have narrow 
massing facing a street and may have more than one story, 
entries are typically on the narrow side of the unit and typically 
face a street or courtyard.  
Building Type, Two-Family. A residential building in which 
two residential dwelling units are contained within a single free-
standing structure. Units may be arranged side-by-side, above-
and-below, front-to-back, or in another arrangement.  
Compliance Guidelines. Compliance Guidelines for Multi-
Family Zoning Districts Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act as 
further revised or amended from time to time. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
4 
Development Area. A portion of a tract designated by the 
Applicant. It shall encompass the areas to be disturbed, 
modified, and/or used for the proposed development, including 
building sites, buildings, structures, parking areas, streets, 
sidewalks, walkways, driveways, private yard areas, usable 
common outdoor spaces, utility areas, and infrastructure. In 
limited cases, land outside of the Development Area may be 
disturbed, modified, and/or used per Section 8.4.5.3. 
Developable land. Land on which multi-family housing can be 
permitted and constructed. For purposes of these guidelines, 
developable land consists of: (i) all privately-owned land except 
lots or portions of lots that meet the definition of excluded land, 
and (ii) developable public land. 
Developable public land. Any publicly-owned land that (i) is 
used by a local housing authority; (ii) has been identified as a 
site for housing development in a housing production plan 
approved by EOHLC; or (iii) has been designated by the public 
owner for disposition and redevelopment. Other publicly-owned 
land may qualify as developable public land if EOHLC 
determines, at the request of an MBTA community and after 
consultation with the public owner, that such land is the 
location of obsolete structures or uses, or otherwise is suitable 
for conversion to multi-family housing, and will be converted to 
or made available for multi-family housing within a reasonable 
period of time. 
Development Site. The land area encompassed in a 
development proposal regardless of the number or configuration 
of lots, land ownership, or municipal boundaries. 
Development Standards. Provisions of Section 8.4.9 General 
Development Standards made applicable to projects within the 
MCMOD. 
EOHLC. The Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and 
Livable Communities, DHCD’s successor agency. 
Excluded land. Per the Compliance Guidelines, land areas on 
which it is not possible or practical to construct multi- family 
housing. For purposes of the Compliance Guidelines, excluded 
land is defined by reference to the ownership, use codes, use 
restrictions, and hydrological characteristics in MassGIS and 
consists of the following: 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
5 
(i) All publicly-owned land, except for lots or portions of lots 
determined to be developable public land. 
(ii) All rivers, streams, lakes, ponds and other surface 
waterbodies. 
(iii) All wetland resource areas, together with a buffer zone 
around wetlands and waterbodies equivalent to the minimum 
setback required by title 5 of the state environmental code. 
(iv) Protected open space and recreational land that is legally 
protected in perpetuity (for example, land owned by a local land 
trust or subject to a conservation restriction), or that is likely to 
remain undeveloped due to functional or traditional use (for 
example, cemeteries). 
(v) All public rights-of-way and private rights-of-way. 
(vi) Privately-owned land on which development is prohibited 
to protect private or public water supplies, including, but not 
limited to, Zone I wellhead protection areas and Zone A surface 
water supply protection areas. 
(vii) Privately-owned land used for educational or institutional 
uses such as a hospital, prison, electric, water, wastewater or 
other utility, museum, or private school, college or university. 
Gross density. A units-per-acre density measurement that 
includes land occupied by public rights-of-way and any 
recreational, civic, commercial, and other nonresidential uses. 
Height, Building. The vertical distance measured between the 
mean elevation (average grade) where the foundation of the 
building meets the soil and the mid-point between the eaves and 
the ridge of a peaked roof, or the top of the structure of the 
highest roof beams of a flat roof, or the deck of a mansard roof.  
Infeasible. Not technologically possible, or not economically 
practicable and achievable in light of best industry practices. 
Mixed-use development. Development containing a mix of 
residential uses and non- residential uses, including, 
commercial, institutional, industrial, or other uses. 
Multi-family housing. A building with three or more residential 
dwelling units or two or more buildings on the same lot with 
more than one residential dwelling unit in each building. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
6 
Multi-family zoning district. A zoning district, either a base 
district or an overlay district, in which multi-family housing is 
allowed as-of-right. 
Open space.  The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings or 
structures, not devoted to streets, driveways, off-street parking 
or loading spaces. Open space may include natural areas, fields 
used for agriculture or horticulture, facilities for low impact 
development stormwater management, wastewater leach fields, 
walkways and paths other than required sidewalks, off street 
bicycle paths, and facilities for outdoor use by the occupants of 
the lot such as swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, vegetable 
gardens, terraces and patios. When used in the context of 
Dimensional Standards, Open Space is expressed as a 
percentage of the designated development area. 
Overlay District: A zoning district that is applied over one or 
more previously established zoning districts. An Overlay 
District may establish additional or alternative requirements for 
properties in the Overlay District that are different than the 
requirements in the underlying zoning district. 
Residential Dwelling Unit: See "Dwelling Unit” in Section 2 of 
this Bylaw. 
Section 3A. Section 3A of the Zoning Act. 
Setback. The minimum required distance from a lot line to any 
part of a principal or accessory building nearest such lot line. A 
setback shall be measured perpendicular (at a right angle) to the 
lot line.  
Setback, Front. Setback required from a front lot line or street 
line. Any edge of a lot fronting on a street shall be considered a 
front lot line.  
Setback, Rear. Setback required from a rear lot line.  
Setback, Side. Setback required from a side lot line. 
Story. That portion of a building contained between any floor 
and the floor or roof next above it, but not including the lowest 
portion if more than 1/2 that portion is below the mean finished 
grade of the ground adjoining the building. If a mezzanine floor 
area exceeds 1/3 of the area of the floor immediately below it, 
the mezzanine shall be deemed to be a story. An attic shall not 
be deemed to be a story if unfinished and without human 
occupancy. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
7 
Story, Half. A partial story under a gable, gambrel, or hip roof, 
the wall plates of which do not rise more than four feet above 
the floor on any two sides of such partial story. 
Surface parking. One or more parking spaces without a built 
structure above the space. A solar panel designed to be installed 
above a surface parking space does not count as a built structure 
for the purposes of this definition. 
 
8.4.4. Permitted Uses 
8.4.4.1. Uses Permitted As-of-Right 
The following uses are permitted as-of-right within the 
MCMOD: 
a. Multi-family housing. 
b. Exempt uses as defined in the Zoning Act (MGL C. 
40 §3) 
a. Uses which are permitted in all districts per Section 
4.2.  
b. Uses which are permitted in Residential A, B, and C 
Districts per Section 4.3.2, except for the uses described 
in paragraphs:  
i. 4.3.2.c.v.(4) (School buses)  
ii. 4.3.2.c.v.(5). (Commercial vehicles which 
are unregistered or abandoned) 
iii. 4.3.2.d. (Bed and Breakfast) 
c. Mixed-use development, provided it meets the 
following conditions: 
i. It includes a mix of residential use and any of 
the following uses: 
(1) Retail store or service establishment, 
the principal activity of which shall be 
the offering of goods or services at 
retail within the building.  

===== PAGE 35 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
35 
8.4.9.7. Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant and subject 
to compliance with the Compliance Guidelines, the 
Site Plan Review Authority may waive the 
requirements of this Section 8.4.9 General 
Development Standards, in the interests of design 
flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a 
finding of consistency of such variation with the 
overall purpose and objectives of the MCMOD. 
 
8.4.10. Affordability Requirements.  
8.4.10.1. Section 6.1 Inclusionary Housing Requirements 
applies to all residential development in the MCMOD.  
8.4.10.2. Notwithstanding, Section 6.1.6. “Fractional Affordable 
Housing Units and Housing Contribution Payments”, 
when calculating the number of units of Affordable 
Housing required within a development project, a 
fractional unit shall be rounded down to the next whole 
number. 
8.4.10.3. Affordable Units shall be: 
a. Integrated with the rest of the development and shall 
be compatible in design, appearance, construction, and 
quality of exterior and interior materials with the other 
units and/or lots. 
b. Dispersed throughout the development. 
c. Located such that the units have equal access to 
shared amenities, including light, air, utilities including 
any bicycle storage and Electric Vehicle charging 
stations within the development. 
d. Located such that the units have equal avoidance of 
any potential nuisances as compared to market-rate 
units in the development. 
e. Distributed proportionately amongst the project’s 
unit sizes and types. 
f. Distributed proportionately across each phase of a 
phased development. 

===== PAGE 36 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
36 
8.4.10.4. The Planning Board may waive some or all of the 
inclusionary housing provisions of Section 6.1 when 
the applicant demonstrates that such requirements are 
financially infeasible.  
8.4.11. Site Plan Review 
8.4.11.1. Applicability. Site Plan Review is required for all 
development proposed under the MCMOD.  
8.4.11.2. The provisions of Section 11.3 apply to all 
development under the MCMOD with the following 
modifications:  
a. Notwithstanding the first sentence of 11.3.4.2. “Pre-
Application Conference” an Applicant is encouraged, 
but not required to file a request with the Planning 
Board for a Pre-Application Conference. 
b. For applications under the MCMOD, Section 
11.3.7.1 is replaced with the following: 
The Planning Board may make a Decision as follows:  
i. Approval as Submitted: Approval based on a 
determination that the Application complies 
with the criteria and design performance 
standards set forth in this Bylaw and Section 
8.4.9 General Development Standards.  
ii. Approval with Conditions: Approval of the 
Application subject to reasonable conditions, 
modifications, and restrictions the Planning 
Board may deem necessary to ensure the 
health, safety, and general welfare of the 
community. The Planning Board may not 
impose any condition, modification or 
restriction that would make it infeasible to 
develop multi-family housing that meets the 
standards of this Bylaw. Conditions must be 
consistent with the parameters established by 
EOHLC’s Compliance Guidelines for Multi-
family Zoning Districts Under Section 3A of the 
Zoning Act, as amended. 
iii. Rejection of the Site Plan: The Planning 
Board may reject the Application because:  

===== PAGE 37 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
37 
(1) the Application is incomplete, in 
that the submittal fails to furnish 
adequate information required for 
approval;  
(2) the submittal, although proper in 
form, includes or creates an intractable 
problem so intrusive on the interests of 
the public in one regulated aspect or 
another that, despite best efforts, no 
form of reasonable conditions could be 
devised to satisfy the problem with the 
plan.  
 
c. Notwithstanding the first paragraph (unnumbered) 
of Section 11.3.6. “Site Plan Review Guidelines,” an 
application under the MCMOD need not comply with: 
i.  “Section C, Development Guidelines and 
Standards” of “Section IV. Regulations 
Governing Site Plan Review” found in the 
West Newbury Planning Board Regulations 
Governing the Conduct of Planning Board 
Functions, Meetings, and Hearings Special 
Permits, Site Plan Review, Scenic Road 
Application Guidelines, as amended. Or, 
ii. Sections 11.3.6.1. through 11.3.6.6. of this 
Bylaw.  
8.4.11.3. Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Site 
Plan Review submission, that a project be developed in 
phases subject to the approval of the Site Plan Review 
Authority, provided that the submission shows the full 
buildout of the project and all associated impacts as of 
the completion of the final phase. However, no project 
may be phased solely to avoid the provisions of 
Section 8.4.10 Affordability Requirements. 

===== PAGE 38 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
38 
8.4.11.4. Adoption of Regulations. The Planning Board may 
adopt and amend, by simple majority vote, Design 
Standards or Design Guidelines, to augment the 
General Development Standards, Site Plan Review 
Submission Requirements, or Site Plan Review 
Criteria or guide interpretation of these. Such 
regulations must be objective and not subjective and 
may only address the scale and proportions of 
buildings, the alignment, width, and grade of streets 
and sidewalks, the type and location of infrastructure, 
the location of building and garage entrances, off street 
parking, the protection of significant natural site 
features, the location and design of on-site open 
spaces, exterior signs, and buffering in relation to 
adjacent properties. The regulations may contain 
graphics illustrating a particular standard or definition 
in order to make such standard or definition clear and 
understandable. The regulations shall be consistent 
with the purposes of this section and EOHLC’s 
Compliance Guidelines for Multi-family Zoning 
Districts Under Section 3A of the Zoning Act, as 
amended. 
8.4.12. Severability. 
If any provision of this Section 8.4 is found to be invalid by a 
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of Section 8.4 
shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. The 
invalidity of any provision of this Section 8.4 shall not affect 
the validity of the remainder of the Town of West Newbury 
Zoning. 
 
 

===== PAGE 39 =====
Draft for Planning Board Public Hearing: 3/21/24 
39 
Additional Changes to Zoning Bylaw to implement MCMOD 
Section 3. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
 
3.1. Districts 
 
[Section 3.1.1. amended by Amendment effective May 3, 2012 by vote of Annual Town 
Meeting, Article 22, and approved by the Attorney General on August 30, 2012 and 
posted according to law on September 7, 2012]  
 
3.1.1. For the purpose of this Bylaw, the Town of West Newbury is divided into 
the following districts:  
• Residence A (Res A) 
• Residence B (Res B) 
• Residence C (Res C) 
• Business (Bus) 
• Industrial (Ind)  
 
Overlay Districts:  
• Floodplain Overlay District  
• Groundwater Protection Overlay District  
• Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations Overlay 
District  
• MBTA Communities Multi-family Overlay District (MCMOD) 
 
