
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
1 
40R Merrimac Street, Suite 201 W 
Newburyport, MA 01950 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM – DRAFT FOR REVIEW AND DISCUSSION 
 
To 
Eric Halvorsen, AICP, Vice President and Principal, RKG Associates 
Alison Christensen, Market Analyst, RKG Associates 
 
From 
Emily Keys Innes, AICP, LEED AP ND, President 
 
Date 
September 9, 2024 
 
Project 
24132 – Winthrop 
 
Subject Draft Zoning for Compliance with Section 3A 
 
Cc: 
 
 
 
Please see attached the revised draft of the zoning text for Winthrop. This draft 
incorporates the zoning parameters from the compliance model using the two-
subdistrict compliance scenario. I have also added the modification to the fee-
in-lieu option for the CB District. 
Please let me know if you have any questions. 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
 
2 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
1. ADD Chapter 17.54: Multi-family Overlay District 
Chapter 17.54: Multi-family Overlay District 
17.54.010 Purpose 
The purpose of the Multi-family Overlay District (MFOD) is to allow multi-family housing as of right in 
accordance with Section 3A of the Zoning Act (Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A). This zoning 
provides for as of right multi-family housing to accomplish the following purposes: 
1. Encourage the production of a variety of housing sizes and typologies to provide equal 
access to new housing throughout the community for people with a variety of needs and 
income levels; and 
2. Conly with Section 3A of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A. 
 
17.54.020 Establishment and Applicability 
This MFOD is an overlay district with an area of approximately 27.6 acres that is superimposed over the 
underlying zoning district (s) and shown on the Zoning Map. 
1. Applicability of MFOD. An applicant may develop multi-family housing located within an 
MFOD in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter 17.54 
2. Underlying Zoning. The MFOD is an overlay district superimposed on underlying zoning 
districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw 
governing the respective underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except for 
uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the MFOD. Uses that are not identified in 
Chapter 17.54 are governed by the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s). 
3. Sub-districts. The MFOD contains the following sub-districts, all of which are shown on 
the MFOD Boundary Map:  
a. Seal Harbor Road Subdistrict 
b. Governors Park Subdistrict 
17.54.030 Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter 17.54, the following definitions shall apply. 
1. Affordable unit. A multi-family housing unit that is subject to a use restriction recorded in 
its chain of title limiting the sale price or rent or limiting occupancy to an individual or 
household of a specified income, or both. 
2. Affordable housing. Housing that contains Affordable Units as defined by this Chapter 
17.54. 
3. Area Median Income (AMI). The median family income for the metropolitan statistical 
region that includes the Town of Winthrop, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD). 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
 
3 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
4. Site Plan Review Authority. The Town of Winthrop Planning Board. 
5. Sub-district. An area within the MFOD that is geographically smaller than the MFOD 
district and differentiated from the rest of the district by use, dimensional standards, or 
development standards. 
6. Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). A list of qualified Affordable Housing Units 
maintained by EOHLC used to measure a community's stock of low-or moderate- income 
housing for the purposes of M.G.L. Chapter 40B, the Comprehensive Permit Law. 
17.54.040 Permitted Uses 
1. Uses Permitted As of Right. The following uses are permitted as of right within the MFOD. 
a. Multi-family housing. 
2. Accessory Uses. The following uses are considered accessory as of right to any of the 
permitted uses in Section D.1. 
b. Parking, including surface parking and parking within a structure such as an above-
ground or underground parking garage or other building on the same lot as the 
principal use. 
17.54.050 Dimensional Standards 
1. Table of Dimensional Standards. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning 
Bylaw, the dimensional requirements applicable in the MFOD are as follows: 
 
Seal Harbor Road 
Subdistrict 
Governors Park 
Subdistrict 
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)  
100,000 
20,000 
Maximum Density  
1,600 SF of lot area  
per dwelling unit 
1,900 SF of lot area  
per dwelling unit 
Minimum Frontage (feet) 
100 
100 
Minimum Lot Width (feet) 
100 
100 
Maximum Lot Coverage 
20% 
30% 
Minimum Open Space 
30% 
30% 
Minimum Yard Setback (feet)  
 
 
Front 
50 
25 
Side  
50 
25 
Rear  
50 
40 
Maximum Number of Stories  
6 
3 
Maximum Height (feet)  
65 
35 
 
2. Multi-Building Lots. In the MFOD, lots may have more than one principal building. 
3. Exceptions. The limitation on the height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, 
ventilators, towers, silos, spires, or other ornamental features of buildings, which features 
are in no way used for living purposes and do not constitute more than 25% of the ground 
floor area of the building. The Site Plan Review Authority or Special Permit Granting 
Authority may waive the height and setbacks in this Chapter 17.54 to accommodate the 
installation of solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, living, and other eco-roofs, energy 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
 
4 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
storage, and air-source heat pump equipment. Such installations shall not create a 
significant detriment to abutters in terms of noise or shadow and must be appropriately 
integrated into the architecture of the building and the layout of the site. The installations 
shall not provide additional habitable space within the development. 
17.54.060 Off-Street Parking 
These parking requirements are applicable to development in the MFOD. 
1. Number of parking spaces. Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit are required for 
multi-family use in this Chapter 17.54. The required number of parking spaces shall be 
permitted either in surface parking or within garages or other structures. 
2. Number of bicycle parking spaces. 0.4 bicycle parking spaces per dwelling unit are 
required for multi-family use in this Chapter 17.54. The required number of parking 
spaces shall be permitted either in surface parking or within garages or other 
structures: 
17.54.070 Affordability Requirements 
1. Purpose. 
a. Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by encouraging a diversity of housing 
opportunities for people of different income levels; 
b. Provide for a full range of housing choices for households of all incomes, ages, and 
sizes; and 
c. Increase the production of affordable housing units to meet existing and anticipated 
housing needs. 
2. Applicability. This requirement is applicable to all residential developments with ten (10) 
or more dwelling units, whether new construction, substantial rehabilitation, expansion, 
reconstruction, or residential conversion (Applicable Projects). No project may be divided 
or phased to avoid the requirements of this section. 
3. Affordability requirement: Subsidized Housing Inventory. All units affordable to 
households earning 80% or less of AMI created in the MFOD under this section must be 
eligible for listing on EOHLC’s Subsidized Housing Inventory. 
4. Provision of Affordable Housing. In Applicable Projects, not fewer than ten percent (10%) 
of housing units constructed shall be Affordable Housing Units. For purposes of 
calculating the number of units of Affordable Housing required within a development 
project, a fractional unit shall be rounded down to the next whole number. The Affordable 
Units shall be available to households earning income up to eighty percent (80%) of the 
AMI. 
5. Development Standards. Affordable Units shall be: 
a. Integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, 
appearance, construction, and quality of exterior and interior materials with the other 
units and/or lots; 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
 
5 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
b. Dispersed throughout the development; 
c. Located such that the units have equal access to shared amenities, including light and 
air, and utilities (including any bicycle storage and/or Electric Vehicle charging 
stations) within the development; 
d. Located such that the units have equal avoidance of any potential nuisances as 
market-rate units within the development; 
e. Distributed proportionately among unit sizes; and 
f. Distributed proportionately across each phase of a phased development. 
g. Occupancy permits may be issued for market-rate units prior to the end of 
construction of the entire development, provided that occupancy permits for 
Affordable Units are issued simultaneously on a pro-rata basis. 
6. Administration. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for administering 
and enforcing the requirements in this section. 
17.54.080  Development Standards 
1. Development standards in the MFOD are applicable to all multi-family development within 
the MFOD. These standards are components of the Site Plan Review process in Section 
17.54.090 Site Plan Review. 
2. Site Design. 
a. Connections. Sidewalks shall provide direct connections among building entrances, 
the public sidewalk (if applicable), bicycle storage, and parking. 
b. Vehicular access. Where feasible, curb cuts shall be minimized, and shared 
driveways encouraged. 
c. Screening for Parking. Surface parking adjacent to a public sidewalk shall be 
screened by a landscaped buffer of sufficient width to allow the healthy establishment 
of trees, shrubs, and perennials, but no less than six (6) feet. The buffer may include a 
fence or wall of no more than three (3) feet in height unless there is a significant grade 
change between the parking and the sidewalk. 
d. Parking Materials. The parking surface may be concrete, asphalt, decomposed 
granite, bricks, or pavers, including pervious materials but not including grass or soil 
not contained within a paver or other structure. 
e. Plantings. Plantings shall include species that are native or adapted to the region. 
Plants on the Massachusetts Prohibited Plant List, as may be amended, shall be 
prohibited. 
f. Lighting. Light levels shall meet or exceed the minimum design guidelines defined by 
the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) and shall provide 
illumination necessary for safety and convenience while preventing glare and overspill 
onto adjoining properties and reducing the amount of skyglow. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
 
6 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
g. Mechanicals. Mechanical equipment at ground level shall be screened by a 
combination of fencing and plantings. Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be 
screened if visible from a public right-of-way. 
h. Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be screened by fencing and plantings. Where possible, 
dumpsters or other trash and recycling collection points shall be located within the 
building. 
i. 
Stormwater management. Strategies that demonstrate compliance of the 
construction activities and the proposed project with the most current versions of the 
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management 
Standards, the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, Massachusetts Erosion 
Sediment and Control Guidelines, and, if applicable, additional requirements under 
the Town of Winthrop’s MS4 Permit for projects that disturb more than one acre and 
discharge to the Town’s municipal stormwater system, and an Operations and 
Management Plan for both the construction activities and ongoing post-construction 
maintenance and reporting requirements. 
3. Buildings: General. 
a. Position relative to the principal street. The primary building shall have its principal 
façade and entrance facing the principal street. 
b. Entries. Where feasible, entries shall be clearly defined and linked to a paved 
pedestrian network that includes the public sidewalk. 
4. Buildings: Multiple buildings on a lot. 
a. Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized to reduce the amount of 
impervious surface. Where possible, parking and loading areas shall be connected to 
minimize curb cuts onto public rights-of-way. 
b. A paved pedestrian network shall connect parking to the entries to all buildings and 
the buildings to each other. 
c. The orientation of multiple buildings on a lot should reinforce the relationships among 
the buildings. All building façade(s) shall be treated with the same care and attention 
in terms of entries, fenestration, and materials. 
d. The building(s) adjacent to the public street shall have a pedestrian entry facing the 
public street. 
5. Buildings: Shared Outdoor Space. Multi-family housing shall have common outdoor 
space that all residents can access. Such space may be on the ground floor, courtyard, 
rooftop, or terrace.  
6. Buildings: Corner Lots. A building on a corner lot shall indicate a primary entrance either 
along one of the street-facing façades or on the primary corner as an entrance serving both 
streets. 
a. Such entries shall be connected by a paved surface to the public sidewalk, if 
applicable. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
 
7 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
b. All façades visible from a public right-of-way shall be treated with similar care and 
attention in terms of entries, fenestration, and materials. 
c. Fire exits serving more than one story shall not be located on either of the street-facing 
façades. 
7. Buildings: Infill Lots. If the adjacent buildings are set back at a distance that exceeds the 
minimum front yard requirements, infill buildings shall meet the requirements of Section 
17.54.050 Dimensional Standards. Otherwise, infill buildings may match the setback line 
of either adjacent building or an average of the setback of the two buildings to provide 
consistency along the street. 
8. Buildings: Principal Façade and Parking. Parking shall be subordinate in design and 
location to the principal building façade. 
a. Surface parking. Surface parking shall be located to the rear or side of the principal 
building. Parking shall not be located in the setback between the building and any lot 
line adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
b. Integrated garages. The principal pedestrian entry into the building shall be more 
prominent in design and placement than the vehicular entry into the garage. 
c. Parking structures. Building(s) dedicated to structured parking on the same lot as one 
or more multi-family buildings shall be subordinate in design and placement to the 
multi-family building(s) on the lot. 
9. Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant, the Site Plan Review Authority may waive the 
requirements of this Section 17.54.080 Development Standards, in the interests of design 
flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of such variation 
with the overall purpose and objectives of the MFOD. 
17.54.090  Site Plan Review 
1. Applicability. All projects within the MFOD are subject to Site Plan Review. An application 
for Site Plan Review shall be reviewed by the Permitting Authority for consistency with the 
purpose and intent of Sections 17.54.040 through 17.54.080. 
2. Other Zoning Sections. The following shall also apply to projects within the MFOD: 
a. 17.40.020 Flood hazard zones. Under Section 17.040.070 New subdivisions and 
development, the requirement for adequate drainage and protection of utilities from 
floodwater damage are incorporated into this Site Plan Review. 
b. 17.24.020 Environmental performance. The review procedures in this section, 
which are applicable to projects requiring a special permit, do not apply to projects 
within the MFOD. 
3. Submission Requirements. As part of any application for Site Plan Review for a project 
within the MCMOD submitted under Sections 17.54.050 through 17.54.080, the Applicant 
must submit the following documents to the Municipality: 
a. Application and fee for Site Plan Review. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
 
8 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
b. Site plans that show the position of the building on the site, points of vehicular access 
to and from the site and vehicular circulation on the site, stormwater management, 
utilities, and landscape treatments, including any screening of adjacent properties, 
and other information commonly required by Municipality for Site Plan Review. 
c. Elevations of the building(s) showing the architectural design of the building. 
d. All site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, and/or a 
civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All landscape plans 
shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth 
of Massachusetts. All building elevations shall be prepared by a certified architect 
registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All plans shall be signed and 
stamped, and drawings prepared at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') or 
larger, or at a scale as approved in advance by the Permitting Authority. 
e. Narrative of compliance with the applicable development standards of Section 
17.54.080. 
4. Timeline. Site Plan Review should commence no later than 30 days after the submission 
of a complete application and should be completed expeditiously. The site plan review 
authority may, when appropriate, seek the input of other municipal boards or officials. In 
general, site plan review should be completed no more than 6 months after the 
submission of the application. 
5. Site Plan Approval. Site Plan approval for uses listed in Section 17.54.040 Permitted Uses 
shall be granted upon a determination by the Site Plan Review Authority that the following 
conditions have been satisfied. The Site Plan Review Authority may impose reasonable 
conditions, at the expense of the applicant, to ensure that these conditions have been 
satisfied. 
a. the Applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in the Town 
of Winthrop’s requirements for a Building Permit and Site Plan Review; and 
b. the project as described in the application meets the development standards set forth 
in Section17.54.080 Development Standards. 
6. Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Site Plan Review submission, that a 
project be developed in phases subject to the approval of the Site Plan Review Authority, 
provided that the submission shows the full buildout of the project and all associated 
impacts as of the completion of the final phase. However, no project may be phased solely 
to avoid the provisions of Section 17.54.070 Affordability Requirements. 
17.54.100 Severability. 
If any provision of this Chapter 17.54 is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the 
remainder of Chapter 17.54 shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. The invalidity of any 
provision of this Chapter 17.54 shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Town of Winthrop’s  
Zoning. 
 

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
Section 3A Zoning | Town of Winthrop 
 
9 
Prepared by Innes Associates on behalf of RKG Associates 
2. MODIFY 17.50.210.D 
D. Fees in Lieu of Parking. In the Center Business district, any commercial or mixed-use structure that 
is required to provide parking spaces may make payments to the town in lieu of providing for all or part 
of the on-site required parking. Payment made to the town in-lieu of providing up to fifty (50) percent of 
the required on-site parking spaces for a project in the central business district (CBD) shall be allowed 
by special permit from the planning board as part of its Major Site Plan and Design Review Process 
described under Chapter 17.50, consistent with standards to be adopted by, and published in 
advance by the planning board. These standards must be kept on file with the Winthrop Town Clerk. 
