
===== PAGE 1 =====
Exported February 12, 2025  12:30 PM
2025 Action Plan for MBTA Communities
Description Area
Please read the Section 3A Regulations before attempting to
complete this form.This form must be submitted by Rapid Transit
Communities that did not submit a district compliance application
by December 31, 2023, and by Commuter Rail or Adjacent
Communities that did not submit a district compliance application
by December 31, 2024. Adjacent Small Towns, and communities
that submitted district compliance applications by the applicable
date do not need to submit a new Action Plan. This form must be
submitted by a municipal official with authority to act on behalf of
the municipality, and it must be accompanied by a signed
statement on municipal letterhead including the following
language:"It is the full intention of the [Town Administrator/Town
Manager/Mayor] &nbsp;to take necessary actions to bring any
zoning intended to comply with all requirements of G.L. c. 40A,
Section 3A and 760 CMR 72 to a vote of [municipality's legislative
body] in the timeframe described in this Action Plan, and to
submit a District Compliance Application to EOHLC no later than
July 14, 2025"For Towns: The statement must be signed by the
Town Manager/AdministratorFor Cities: The statement must be
signed by the Mayor&nbsp;
Section 1: Identification
Description Area
The Section 3A regulations establish zoning metrics that apply
uniquely to each MBTA community based on its local transit
stations, existing housing stock, population, &nbsp;and
developable land. &nbsp;This section of the Action Plan helps to
identify the transit stations that determined each community's
category. &nbsp;The MBTA Community Categories and
Requirements sheet lists each municipality's community category,
minimum multi-family unit capacity, and other
requirements.&nbsp;
1.1  MBTA Community Name
Winthrop
1.2. Community Category
Adjacent community
1.3. Multifamily Unit Capacity
Requirement
882
1.4. Does this municipality have
any MBTA rapid transit stations
within its boundaries?
No

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.5. Does this municipality have
any MBTA commuter rail stations
within its boundaries?
No
1.6. Does this municipality have
any other MBTA transit stations
that are located outside of its
municipal boundaries that may
have "developable station area"
within them?
No
1.7. Please provide the name of
the person filling out this form
Anthony Marino
1.7a. Title
Town Manager
1.7b. Email Address
amarino@winthropma.gov
1.7c. Phone Number
(617) 846-1705
1.8 Please provide the name of
the municipal CEO
Anthony Marino
1.8b Mailing address of municipal
CEO
One Metcalf Square
Winthrop, MA 02152
1.8c Email address of municipal
CEO
amarino@winthropma.gov
1.9. Please briefly describe other
members of the core team
developing the multi-family
zoning district.
The core team members are the Winthrop Town Manager,
Anthony Marino, the Assistant Town Manager in charge of
Economic Development & Planning, Cheryl McCormick, and Town
Attorney James Cipoletta.  As we have already created a plan
based on the previously approved Guidelines, we will have input
from the Planning Board and the Winthrop Town Council. We will
run any plans or changes to existing plans by our consultant, Erik
Halvorsen, from RKG Associates.  Winthrop's Planning Board has
five members with a diverse knowledge of planning, construction,
and zoning bylaws.  Winthrop's Town Council consists of nine
members with varying experience who have been actively
involved in the prior process of creating an overlay district plan. 
Also, as stated above, Winthrop has the services of Eric Halvorsen
and his team at RKG associates to assist in any changes from the
previously approved guidelines and the anticipated promulgated
regulations that EOHLC proposes.  We are in the comment period
as of the date that this action plan is being drafted. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Section 2: Housing Overview
2.1. To the best of your
knowledge, does this
municipality have any existing
zoning districts that allow
multi-family housing as of right,
at at least 15 units per acre as
measured in gross density?
No
2.2. Does this municipality have
any established housing related
goals or strategies from
municipal planning documents,
such as a Housing Production
Plan, Master Plan, or Economic
Development Plan?
Yes
2.2a. Please briefly describe any
relevant strategies, goals, or
objectives, and the work that has
been done to date.
The Winthrop Planning Board submitted a MBTA Communities
compliance plan to the Town Council for approval.  This plan
included two overlay districts at Seal Harbor Road (Seal Harbor 1
& 3 and Fort Heath Apartments) and Governors Park
Condominiums located off Revere Street.  This plan also included
taking approximately 220 offset units from our Center Business
District (CBD) to acknowledge the development that has already
occurred and potential future development.  Winthrop will also
submit suggested language during the Public Comment period to
promulgate MBTA Communities regulations to include a density
exemption.  
Currently, Winthrop has approximately 158 new residential units
in various stages of approval for construction, which will only add
to our already high housing density.
Once the new regulations are approved and in effect, the Planning
Board will review and develop a new compliance plan to submit to
the Town Council for their consideration and vote.  
2.3. Is this municipality currently
working on any other planning
for housing?
No
2.4. Has this municipality's
legislative ever voted on whether
to adopt a zoning district
intended to comply with Section
3A?
Yes

===== PAGE 4 =====
2.5. Has this municipality
received state funding or
consultant assistance from
Massachusetts Housing
Partnership (MHP) for technical
assistance to support compliance
with Section 3A?
Yes
Section 3: Preliminary Zoning Strategies
3.1. To the best of your
knowledge, which of the
following zoning strategies is this
community most likely to use for
compliance?  (Select all that
apply)
c. A new 40R or other overlay zoning district
e. Other zoning strategy

===== PAGE 5 =====
3.1c. Please briefly describe the
potential district and location.
Optional: Attach any supporting
documents that show planning
work the community has already
done for this district(s).
Winthrop is a peninsula prone to coastal flooding.  Winthrop is one
of the highest housing density towns in the commonwealth and
has made zoning changes over the years to allow housing
development in its commercial downtown (Center Business
District), Waterfront Properties (Waterfront Districts), and
two-family homes are allowed as a matter of right in all other
residential districts.  Currently, Winthrop has approximately 158
units in various stages of approval for construction, which will
only add to our already high housing density. 
 
The original plan brought forward by the Planning Board for
consideration by the Winthrop Town Council included two overlay
districts at Seal Harbor Road (Seal Harbor 1 & 3 and Fort Heath
Apartments) and Governors Park Condos located off of Revere
Street.  This plan also included taking approximately 220 offset
units from our CBD district to acknowledge the development that
has already occurred and potential future development.  Lastly, it
included a change to the CBD zoning language parking section
that removed a special permit requirement and allowed that
section to be reviewed during the site plan review by the Planning
Board.  The Town Council voted at their meeting on November 19,
2024, 4-3, with one abstention and one recusal to not approve the
Planning Board's recommended plan.  The reason for the
abstention was that the Councilor wanted to wait for the verdict in
the Town of Milton vs. the Attorney General's Office before they
voted. 
 
It is assumed that the newly promulgated regulations will be
similar to the previously approved guidelines if not precisely the
same.  However, Winthrop will submit suggested language during
the public comment period to include a density exemption in the
new regulations and is hopeful that the EOHLC and Secretary
Augustus will give this fair consideration for all of the
abovementioned reasons.  In addition to the reasons listed above,
it should also be mentioned that as of 2020, Winthrop has 5669
multi-family units, which is 64% of its housing stock, and 3239
Single-family structures, which is 36% of its housing stock.  The
housing density listed above, along with our current rate of
development, proximity to the MWRA Sewage Treatment facility
located at Deer Island and Logan Airport, and all of the flooding
concerns, easily make the case for a density exemption being
added to the new regulations. 
 
Winthrop has already worked to create new housing units long
before MBTA Communities/3A zoning was being considered and a
density exemption that acknowledges that work should be added
to the new regulations before they are approved.  

===== PAGE 6 =====
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/17575527236
3.1e. Please briefly explain the
strategy. Optional: Attach any
supporting documents that show
planning work this community
has already done for this
strategy.
The Winthrop Planning Board submitted a MBTA Communities
Compliance Plan to the Winthrop Town Council for consideration
and a vote that occurred on November 19, 2024.  
The Winthrop Town Council (9 members) at their November 19,
2024 meeting voted not to accept the Planning Boards Plan 4-3
with one abstention and one recusal. 
The Proposed zoning language and cover letter from the Winthrop
Planning Board Chairperson is attached.  
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/17575527238
3.2. What non-housing
characteristics are important for
this community to consider in its
3A zoning district?
Access to Public transportation and walkability.  
Section 4: Action Plan Timeline
Description Area
This section creates a framework to input preliminary plans for a
zoning adoption process. On the table below, please use Column
1 (from the left) to describe a task, Column 2 to input a start date,
and Column 3 to input a finish date. Every community must
provide a timeline for the below-listed tasks. &nbsp;Additional
space is provided for any other tasks that a community wishes to
list. EOHLC will review proposed timelines for feasibility before
approving an Action Plan.&nbsp;Public outreachDeveloping
zoning&nbsp;Applying EOHLC's compliance model to test for
density and unit capacityHolding planning board
hearings&nbsp;Holding legislative sessions and adopt compliant
zoning&nbsp;Submit District Compliance application to EOHLC
Description Area
Task
Description Area
Start
Description Area
Finish
Short Answer
Public Outreach
Mar 01, 2025

===== PAGE 7 =====
Mar 31, 2025
Short Answer
Develop Zoning (Assuming Regulations are similar to Guidelines) 
Apr 01, 2025
Apr 30, 2025
Short Answer
Applying EOHLC's compliance model to test for density and unit
capacity
May 01, 2025
May 15, 2025
Short Answer
Holding Planning Board Meetings
May 16, 2025
Jun 16, 2025
Short Answer
Holding Legislative Sessions and Town Council considers adopting
compliant zoning
Jun 17, 2025
Jul 11, 2025
Short Answer
Submit District Compliance Application to EOHLC if approved by
the Legislative Body (Town Council)
Jul 14, 2025
Section 5: Signatures, Certifications, and Attestations
Description Area
Please attach a signed statement on municipal letterhead,
including the following language:"I certify that it is my full
intention as [title of official] of [municipality] to take necessary
actions to bring any zoning intended to comply with all
requirements of G.L. c. 40A, Section 3A and 760 CMR 72 to a vote
of [municipality's legislative body] in the timeframe described in
this Action Plan, and to submit a District Compliance Application
to EOHLC no later than Jul 14, 2025"For Towns: The statement
must be signed by the Town Manager/AdministratorFor Cities: The
statement must be signed by the Mayor&nbsp;
File
https://www.formstack.com/admin/download/file/17575527273
